We systematically searched the PubMed/MEDLINE, Embase, Scopus, EBSCO, Web of Science and Cochrane library databases for randomized controlled trials (RCTs) that assessed the effect of probiotic treatment on SCORAD value in pediatric patients with AD compared with a placebo group between 1 January 2010 and 1 January 2023. The risk of bias and the certainty of evidence were assessed using Cochrane ROB 2.0.

A total of 10 outcomes from 9 RCTs involving 1000 patients were included. Three of these outcomes were analyzed as dichotomous variables in 373 patients. The other seven were analyzed for continuous variables in 627 patients. A meta‐analysis of the random‐effect model of the dichotomous variables demonstrated no significant difference between the probiotic and control groups [OR = 1.75, 95% confidence interval (CI) (0.70, 4.35), p = 0.23, I

Evidence on the improvement effect of probiotics on pediatric patients with AD is limited. This study showed that single‐strain probiotic treatment exerts a positive effect on AD. Restricted to the quantity and quality of incorporated studies, these conclusions have yet to be validated by high‐quality studies.

Microbiota dysbiosis is influenced by different environmental factors, including diet and Vitamin D (VD) exposure and intake. Maternal prenatal nutrition and dietary diversity are key factors in child development. The worldwide increase in allergic diseases parallels the prevalence of VD deficiency in Western countries, supporting the hypothesis that VD influences allergy development. VD levels are affected not only by sun exposure but also by diet, making it an important modifiable factor for allergy prevention.

Maintaining the structural diversity of the gut microbiota can resist the invasion of pathogenic bacteria and reduce the nutrient competition between potentially harmful bacteria and commensal bacteria. Gut microbiota involved in short‐chain fatty acid and amino acid metabolism induce maturation of the innate and adaptive immune systems. Thus, the gut microbiota is a potential target for modulating host immune responses. With the development of sequencing technology, many studies have revealed the correlation between gut microbiota and human diseases (including allergic asthma, atopic dermatitis). The “Gut‐Skin” axis has been proposed and considered as a new target for the prevention and treatment of AD.

Gut microbiota is the most important component of microbial exposure. Therefore, gut microbiota affects the formation of host immune development, and gut microbiota dysbiosis is closely related to immune disorders. Therefore, targeting gut microbiome alterations may be an alternative approach to modulate the immune response and improve skin health in AD patients.

Over the same period, Kalliomäki et al. conducted a randomized controlled study and found that perinatal consumption of the gram‐positive probiotic Lactobacillus rhamnosus (Lactobacillus GG) reduces the incidence of eczema in high‐risk infants by half. Thus, probiotics have gained attention for the treatment of AD. Later studies found that skin bacterial diversity decreases, Malassezia spp. and Cutibacterium (formerly Propionibacterium) acnes decrease and Staphylococcus aureus and Staphylococcus epidermidis are relatively abundant in children with AD.

Kong et al. found through mouse experiments that Corynebacterium mastitidis and Corynebacterium bovis can improve the state of patients with AD, and relevant studies have proven that they can reverse the gut dysbiosis caused by the abuse of antibiotics in early treatment.

All RCTs that evaluated the efficacy of probiotics in AD treatment were included based on the following criteria: (1) Participants aged ≤18 years, Meet the diagnostic criteria of the American Academy of Dermatology Diagnostic Criteria for Atopic Dermatitis,

Chronic or relapsing history, Eczema (acute, subacute, chronic), Pruritus, Typical morphology and age‐specific patterns; (2) Probiotics taken orally with clear coverage of probiotic species, dose and timing of administration; (3) Control groups receiving placebo; (4) Primary endpoints at the time point of follow‐up after the intervention; (5) SCORAD value, a valid indicator for assessing the severity of AD; (6) This parameter should be included in the filtered experimental results for AD diagnostic criteria that meet the search criteria.

The PubMed/MEDLINE, Embase, Scopus, EBSCO, Web of Science and Cochrane library were searched for RCTs (from 1 January 2010 to 1 January 2023). To search as comprehensively as possible, we applied a combination of free word and medical subject terms using the most appropriate Boolean operators to expand the scope of the study and find additional references. Keywords related to AD, probiotics, RCT and children in the title or abstract were searched. Using the PubMed database as an example, the following search terms are employed: Atopic Dermatitis (e.g., “Dermatitis atopic e” or “Dermatitides” or “Neurodermatitis atopic”); Probiotic (e.g., “Probiotics”); Randomized controlled trial (e.g., “Randomized” or “Randomly” or “Clinical trial”). The specific retrieval strategy is displayed in Supplementary Material 2. Two researchers (YXW and XXL) independently assessed all retrieved articles against eligibility criteria. In case of a disagreement, we will discuss it with the team until an agreement has been reached.

Data extraction was quality checked by two other study authors. Data from each study were extracted independently by two researchers (XXL and DZY), who then examined each other's results to avoid errors. The researchers used a standardized form of extraction of the article data, with an extraction table documenting the details of the study, including basic article information (author name, publication year, etc.), intervention characteristics (probiotic species, dosage) and placebo use (placebo type and measure).

The risk of bias was appraised for the primary outcome of AD using the Cochrane Risk of Bias tool using PRISMA guidelines. Assessments were mainly based on random sequence generation, whether the study used blinding, allocation concealment, completeness of data results, selective reporting of data, results and other sources of bias. The assessment was answered and explained through the form.

Data analysis was performed using Review Manager version 5.4.1. For measurement data, the standardized mean difference was used as the effective index, and point estimates and a 95% confidence interval (CI) were given for each effect size. Heterogeneity among the outcomes of the included studies was analyzed using the χ

2 > 50%, the random‐effect model was used. A descriptive statement of the study results was given when the synthetic analysis was not possible. After calculating the results, the combined results with significant heterogeneity were further subjected to sensitivity analysis, subgroup analysis and meta‐regression to help determine the source of heterogeneity. Publication bias testing was performed on outcome indicators with more than 10 included studies. Meta‐analysis of random‐effect or fixed‐effect models was used to estimate combined treatment effects. Subgroup analyses were based on children's age or treatment duration (e.g., ≤3 years or >3 years) and type of probiotics.

A total of 1486 studies were retrieved from the electronic database. Among these studies, 756 duplicate documents were removed, and 730 articles remained. We obtained the results of the first screening by excluding factors such as animal experiments, literature type review, inconsistent outcome indicators, duplication and incomplete data. A total of 53 cases met the conditions for full‐text review. After a careful review of the full text, 9 studies

Table 1 summarizes the essential characteristics of the included studies. Of the 9 RCTs from 2010 to 2021, 5 used multi‐strain mixtures to treat AD, and the other 4 used single‐strain interventions. The participants included in the study were children and infants aged 0–18 years, including a premature infant in one study. The most common intervention period in the included studies was 12 weeks. Bifidobacterium lactis is a commonly used probiotic strain, and the doses used for the probiotic strains in the trial population varied. However, 1.0 × 1010 colony‐forming units were the most frequently used dose in the included studies.

The risk of bias in the studies is presented in Table 2. The included studies were high‐quality RCTs, and most of the studies followed high standards: 5 (56%) appropriately generated random sequences, 3 (33%) applied appropriate approaches for allocation concealment, and 9 (100%) used blinding.

involving 627 children were analyzed for continuous variables. The outcomes of a meta‐analysis of the random‐effect model of dichotomous variables showed no significant differences between the probiotic and control groups [OR = 1.75, 95% CI (0.70, 4.35), p = 0.23, I

2 = 0%]. This study enrolled preterm infants, which may have been a major source of heterogeneity in effects, considering the imperfect immune system function of this population. The sensitivity analysis of continuous variables was also performed. After removing the study of Wang,

2 = 36%). The SCORAD values in this study significantly differed between the probiotic and placebo groups. In studies that analyzed the effect of probiotics on AD severity, the SCORAD values were significantly lower in the pretreatment group than in the placebo group. However, at 3 months, the children in the probiotic group had lower SCORAD values than those in the placebo group. After 1 month of discontinuation of probiotics, no significant improvement in SCORAD value was observed in the probiotic group. After adjusting for age, sex and topical steroid use, the SCORAD scores remained significantly lower across groups. This result suggested that probiotics reduced serum Interleukin‐4 (IL‐4) and Tumor Necrosis Factor‐α (TNF‐α) but increased Interferon‐γ (IFN‐γ) and Transforming Growth Factor‐β levels at the end of treatment. Other serum indicators, except for IL‐4, were not statistically significant. Imbalances in gut microbiota composition and metabolic function due to dietary and lifestyle changes have been associated with the pathogenesis of atopic diseases. Activation of the IL‐4/IL‐13 axis in AD promotes the disruption of the skin barrier and is associated with changes in the gut microbiota.

The inconsistency of outcome measures may be the most important reason for heterogeneity. Another source of heterogeneity was that the patients did not completely suppress topical steroid use because of ethical concerns. We completed the meta‐analysis after removing this study with a greater effect on heterogeneity and found that the difference between the probiotic and control groups was still statistically significant [MD = −2.24, 95% CI (−4.15, −0.34), p = 0.002, I

AD is a common chronic inflammatory skin disease with heterogeneous clinical manifestations and multiple overlapping factors. It is associated with mutations in epidermal genes, skin barrier dysfunction, immune disorders, changes in lipid composition and gut microbial imbalances.

Evidence suggests that microbial exposure is important in AD development. Gut dysbiosis, which is a disequilibrium in gut microbial components and functions, has been implicated in the pathophysiology of various diseases, including AD and other allergic disorders in early childhood.

They continuously stimulate local and systemic immune responses, including the production of IgE and the formation of germinal centers within lymphoid follicles, through pattern recognition toll‐like receptors, thereby stimulating the development of gut‐associated lymphoid tissue.

With the progress of society and the development of civilization, people have become eager to treat diseases in a simple, cost‐effective and less harmful way. As early as 1997, a study published in the journal Allergy Clin Immunol suggested that probiotics promote endogenous barrier mechanisms and play a therapeutic role in patients with AD and food allergies.

This study is the first to treat AD with probiotics. To clarify the mechanisms by which probiotics regulate the immune system, Viljanen et al. measured the expression levels of IL‐4, IL‐6 and TNF‐α and suggested that probiotics affect AD by relieving inflammation.

The use of probiotics to treat or prevent allergic diseases has gradually become an option for people to fight allergic diseases, but some studies have challenged the role of probiotics in preventing allergies. Taylor et al. found that probiotic supplementation does not reduce AD risk in high‐risk infants and has been associated with increased allergen sensitivity in infants.

Most guidelines, including those from the European Society of Allergy and Clinical Immunology and the European Society of Paediatric Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Nutrition, do not recommend probiotic supplementation for the prevention of allergic disease because of the lack of clear evidence.

In contrast, the World Allergy Organization recommends using probiotics for high‐risk infants because of its potential benefits for pregnant and breastfeeding women and infants to prevent AD. Given the possible synergies with other factors, careful selection of treatment strategies during pregnancy and early infancy is required to determine the optimal target population and ensure the effectiveness of probiotics for allergy prevention.

This study summarizes the latest evidence on the clinical efficacy of probiotics in children with AD from 2010 to 2023. We performed meta‐analyses of dichotomous and continuous variables separately in the included studies. The clinical effect of probiotics in the treatment of AD in children with dichotomous variables was not statistically significant, and the meta‐analysis of continuous variables showed that probiotics were significantly effective in treating AD in children. Considering the high heterogeneity of the results for continuous variables, we performed subgroup analyses based on the number of strains, the age of the children and the duration of treatment. Several issues were identified in the subgroup analyses. First, we found a statistically significant improvement in the SCORAD value with single‐strain probiotics. Doege

et al. performed meta‐analyses of the effect of probiotic types on AD; the results showed that supplementation with probiotics significantly reduces the risk of AD. However, this effect was only significant for single‐strain probiotics and not for multi‐strain probiotics. Conversely, the current evidence does not show that the prognosis of children with AD is related to treatment duration and age. Michail et al.

performed a subgroup analysis and showed that the improvement in AD is significant when the treatment duration is more than 8 weeks, but not significant when the treatment duration is less than 8 weeks. The heterogeneity of RCTs related to treatment time is not significant, and treatment cycles longer than 8 weeks may have a better effect than treatment cycles shorter than 8 weeks. Zhao et al.

found a significant reduction in SCORAD value in infants with treatment cycles ≤8 weeks. The results of our meta‐analysis are similar to those of Michail's, except for some differences in the definition of treatment cycles. In addition, the meta‐analysis of Michail et al. included small‐scale studies with high heterogeneity, and the reliability of the results warrants large‐scale prospective studies for further confirmation. However, the study of Zhao was limited to infants, and the analysis results could not provide a comprehensive and accurate assessment of the SCORAD value in childhood.

reported in their meta‐analysis that probiotic therapy may be more effective in children aged 1 year or less. In a meta‐analysis with a large number of included studies, probiotics significantly improved the SCORAD value in children over 1 year of age but not in infants under 1 year of age. Notably, the subgroup differences were significant.

Our results are similar to Huang and Zhao's findings; probiotics only reduced the SCORAD value in children aged >3 years, but the difference was not statistically significant. Based on the assumption that probiotics are effective during early development, the establishment and composition of the gut microbiota are typically completed at 2–3 years of age, and the immune system is programmed for future use at this stage. After the age of 3 years, the gut microbiota is completely established, which contributes to the exertion of probiotics.

This study has some limitations. First, the total number of included studies and the sample scales were relatively small, which affected the reliability of the conclusions. Second, some of the included studies did not report allocation concealment, which has a certain risk of bias. Third, the number, types and administration methods of probiotics in different studies may also lead to clinical heterogeneity.

This study showed that single‐strain probiotic treatment exerts a positive effect on the AD. Few studies focused on the improvement of probiotics with AD in children, and future investigators should adopt large sample sizes and extend follow‐up time to assess the mechanisms of action and long‐term effects of probiotics. Research on AD prevention in children should also be increased to explore data for improving children's health. Defined by the quantity and quality of the included studies, the conclusions of the present work warrant further verification by high‐quality studies.

Xiali Xue and Xinwei Yang designed this study. Xiali Xue finished the manuscript. Xiali Xue, Xinwei Yang, and Zhongyi Deng revised the manuscript. Xiubo Shi, Xinwei Yang, Xiali Xue, and Zhongyi Deng collected and analyzed the data. All authors critically commented on drafts of the manuscript.