3800674410709109S2352-3964(23)00457-710.1016/j.ebiom.2023.104891104891ArticlesAnaerobic pathogens associated with OSA may contribute to pathophysiology via amino-acid depletionElgartMichaelelgart@gmail.comab∗∗ZhangYingabZhangYuanabYuBingcdKimYoungmeeeZeePhyllis C.fGellmanMarc D.eBoerwinkleEriccdDaviglusMartha L.gCaiJianwenhRedlineSusanabBurkRobert D.iKaplanRobertijSoferTamartsofer@bidmc.harvard.eduabkl∗aDivision of Sleep and Circadian Disorders, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, MA, USAbDepartment of Medicine, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USAcHuman Genetics Centre, The University of Texas Health Science Centre at Houston, Houston, TX, USAdHuman Genome Sequencing Centre, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, USAeDepartment of Psychology, University of Miami, Coral Gables, FL, USAfDepartment of Neurology and Sleep Medicine Centre, Northwestern University, Chicago, IL, USAgInstitute for Minority Health Research, University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, IL, USAhCollaborative Studies Coordinating Centre, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, USAiDepartment of Epidemiology and Population Health, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, New York, NY, USAjFred Hutchinson Cancer Research Centre, Division of Public Health Sciences, Seattle, WA, USAkDepartment of Biostatistics, Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health, Boston, MA, USAlCardioVascular Institute, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Boston, MA, USA∗Corresponding author. CardioVascular Institute, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Boston, MA, USA. tsofer@bidmc.harvard.edu∗∗Corresponding author. Division of Sleep and Circadian Disorders, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, MA, USA. elgart@gmail.com2411202312202324112023981048916320231211202314112023© 2023 The Author(s)2023https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).SummaryBackgroundThe human microbiome is linked to multiple metabolic disorders such as obesity and diabetes. Obstructive sleep apnoea (OSA) is a common sleep disorder with several metabolic risk factors. We investigated the associations between the gut microbiome composition and function, and measures of OSA severity in participants from a prospective community-based cohort study: the Hispanic Community Health Study/Study of Latinos (HCHS/SOL).MethodsBacterial-Wide Association Analysis (BWAS) of gut microbiome measured via metagenomics with OSA measures was performed adjusting for clinical, lifestyle and co-morbidities. This was followed by functional analysis of the OSA-enriched bacteria. We utilized additional metabolomic and transcriptomic associations to suggest possible mechanisms explaining the microbiome effects on OSA.FindingsSeveral uncommon anaerobic human pathogens were associated with OSA severity. These belong to the Lachnospira, Actinomyces, Kingella and Eubacterium genera. Functional analysis revealed enrichment in 49 processes including many anaerobic-related ones. Severe OSA was associated with the depletion of the amino acids glycine and glutamine in the blood, yet neither diet nor gene expression revealed any changes in the production or consumption of these amino acids.InterpretationWe show anaerobic bacterial communities to be a novel component of OSA pathophysiology. These are established in the oxygen-poor environments characteristic of OSA. We hypothesize that these bacteria deplete certain amino acids required for normal human homeostasis and muscle tone, contributing to OSA phenotypes. Future work should test this hypothesis as well as consider diagnostics via anaerobic bacteria detection and possible interventions via antibiotics and amino-acid supplementation.FundingDescribed in methods.KeywordsMicrobiomeObstructive sleep apnoeaAnaerobicAmino-acid depletion

Research in contextEvidence before this studySeveral studies have suggested that specific bacteria may be associated with Obstructive Sleep Apnoea. A study with larger sample size that can account for lifestyle factors is needed to assess real-world evidence.Added value of this studyIn the largest such study to-date, we account for lifestyle factors such as education, diet, and comorbidities such as diabetes to uncover atypical anaerobic bacteria as associated with OSA. The identified bacteria are known opportunistic pathogens, and we hypothesize that these may contribute to OSA aetiology via depletion of important amino acids.Implications of all the available evidenceThe uncovered associations warrant further study into the diagnostic opportunities of OSA via detection of anaerobic bacteria as well as into novel OSA treatment regimens via antibiotic treatment and amino-acid supplementation.

Obstructive sleep apnoea (OSA) is a common sleep disorder,1 affecting up to 20% of the adult population.2 There are several risk factors for OSA3 such as age, male gender, excess body weight, fat and a strong genetic component.4, 5, 6 Various health conditions such as diabetes and hypertension,7, 8, 9 are also known to co-occur with OSA. An additional factor which may play a role in OSA pathophysiology is the human microbiome, which has been linked with many of the conditions that are associated with OSA.

The human body harbours intricate networks of microbial communities consisting of bacteria, fungi, viruses, bacteriophages, archaea, and eukaryote symbionts colonizing skin,10 gut,11 and other organs. Many studies have characterized these communities and their associations with overall health and diseases,12 yet only a few studies to date addressed the potential association between OSA and microbiome.13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18 One study reported that OSA-associated hypoxia or OSA itself was associated with the gut microbiome.19 Another study reported a higher prevalence of Firmicutes and lower prevalence of Bacteroidetes20 and a higher proportion of Neisseria and lower alpha diversity21 in the oral microbiome of participants with OSA, suggesting a reduction in the diversity of microbial species among participants with OSA. However, to date most studies did not examine specific bacterial species in OSA patients, were underpowered (usually included dozens of subjects), tended to focus on different OSA phenotypes (impeding direct comparison), and failed to consider environmental and clinical factors (such as diabetes, diet, etc.) known to affect either OSA, the microbiome, or both.

In this work, we investigated the associations between the presence and severity of OSA phenotypes and the microbiome composition in the Hispanic Community Health Study/Study of Latinos (HCHS/SOL) cohort,22,23 a large community-based, epidemiological study of the prevalence and development of disease in the Hispanic/Latino population. The HCHS/SOL study assessed the presence and severity of OSA and lifestyle factors at baseline exam. A subset of the HCHS/SOL participants, took part in the Gut Origins of Latino Diabetes (GOLD) ancillary study,24,25 where the data for bacterial species and microbial communities were obtained. We aimed to identify both bacterial species that are correlated with various measures of OSA severity such as the Respiratory Event Index (REI) and measures of oxyhaemoglobin saturation during sleep, and microbial communities, and to use these results to gain insights into the pathophysiology of OSA. We first performed association analysis of all bacterial species and OSA measures, next performed a functional analysis of the microbial enzymatic content, and finally, performed metabolomic profiling of OSA, dietary association analysis and leveraged results from association of gene expression with OSA measures, to explain a pathophysiological mechanism by which bacteria increases risk of OSA.

The Hispanic Community Health Study/Study of Latinos (HCHS/SOL) is a prospective, longitudinal, community-based cohort study in the U.S.,22,23 with multiple smaller ancillary studies. At the baseline examination (termed “visit 1”, 2008–2011) 16,415 study individuals were recruited in 4 recruitment centres (Bronx NY, Chicago IL, Miami FL, San Diego CA) and multiple clinical measures were assessed including blood pressure, lung function, kidney and diabetes phenotypes and sleep phenotypes.22 Following the baseline exam, participants were invited to participate in additional examinations (termed “visit 2”) which included the Gut Origins of Latino Diabetes (GOLD) ancillary study25 during the 2014–2017 period, where multiple additional clinical parameters were assessed, including gut microbiome. Here, we utilize data from the GOLD ancillary study, as well as sleep phenotypes measured via at-home sleep apnoea test (HSAT) (Fig. 1) and available metabolomics and transcriptomics data (see Supplementary Table S1 for codes and descriptions of all phenotypes used in this study).Fig. 1Overview of the analysis performed in this work. Microbiome data from the GOLD ancillary study (left side of the flowchart) was used in bacterial association analysis (Bacterial-Wide Association Study - BWAS), and risk prediction analysis (Bacterial Risk Score - BRS). A total of 20% of the data was held out as test set and BWAS and BRS were calculated based on the remaining 80% data for phylogenetic and functional readouts. It was then assessed on the held-out test set. Finally, we utilized additional metabolomics data from GOLD's parent cohort (HCHS/SOL – middle of the flowchart) and transcriptomics meta-analysis (right side of the flowchart) from the FOS and MESA cohorts, to test mechanistic hypotheses that arose from the BRS/BWAS results.

The flowchart in Fig. 1 depicts the analyses performed in this study. Bacterial-Wide Association Study (BWAS) analysis was performed followed by the development of a Bacterial Risk Score (BRS). The BWAS results were used to formulate hypotheses regarding the mechanistic aspects of microbiome-related pathophysiology, which were then tested via metabolomics data from HCHS/SOL and transcriptomics data from meta-analysis of gene expression of two large cohort studies (the Framingham Offspring Study (FOS;26) and the Multi-Ethnic Study of Atherosclerosis (MESA;27)).

During the HCHS/SOL baseline examination (visit 1) 14,440 individuals participated in a sleep study for assessment of OSA. The sleep study used a validated Type 3 home sleep apnoea test (ARES Unicorder 5.2; B-Alert, Carlsbad, CA) that measured nasal air-flow, position, snoring, heart rate and oxyhaemoglobin saturation as previously described.28 Respiratory events were identified as a 50% or greater reduction in airflow lasting greater than or equal to 10s and associated with ≥3% oxyhaemoglobin desaturation. The Respiratory Event Index (REI) represents the sum of all respiratory events divided by the estimated sleep time. Measurements of oxyhaemoglobin saturation include minimum oxyhaemoglobin saturation (MinSpO2), average oxyhaemoglobin saturation (AvgSpO2) during sleep, and percent sleep time with oxyhaemoglobin saturation <90% (SpO290). OSA severity was treated either as a continuous measure (REI) or divided into standard categories (no OSA (REI <5/hour), mild OSA (5/hour ≤ REI <15/hour), moderate OSA (15/hour≤ REI<30/hour), severe OSA (REI≥ 30/hour)). The other OSA phenotypes (MinSpO2, AvgSpO2, SpO290) were used as continuous measures.

The analysis included participants in the GOLD study that passed the metagenomics quality control filters, who also participated in the sleep study in visit 1 and provided consent to use the data. We excluded 1281 participants who had used antibiotics or indigestion medication in the last 3 months prior to stool collection. In addition, since the microbiome was measured after OSA (at visit 2 vs visit 1, ∼6 yrs on average), the OSA status could have changed between visits. However, REI estimates are reported to be stable for periods of 5–10 years in the absence of major weight change,23 therefore we also excluded 244 participants for whom weight changed significantly (over 10%) from visit 1 to visit 2. Our final dataset consisted of 1117 participants.

Stool samples were self-collected by participants via stool collection kits and mailed for further processing. DNA extraction and shotgun metagenomics sequencing were done using Earth Microbiome Project (EMP) standard protocols, followed by sequencing on an Illumina NovaSeq. See Supplementary Methods for detailed description of all steps.

We used three regression models: the primary, minimally adjusted model (Model 1), included age, sex, and field centre. Model 2 adjusted for additional lifestyle-related factors that are known to influence the microbiome composition (directly or indirectly): education, income level, smoking, alcohol consumption and diet. Finally, Model 3 further adjusted for comorbid conditions: obesity, diabetes and hypertension. See Supplementary Tables S1 and S2 for detailed description of the covariates and models. For the Bacterial-Wide Association Study (BWAS) absolute bacterial species abundances were grouped into genus and family, and all three levels (species, genus, and family) converted to relative abundance. Following this, either weighted linear or logistic regression using GOLD sampling weights were used (the sampling weights used were those recommended by the GOLD study group24; these account for disproportionate sampling of population subgroups in the study design as well as non-response cases). Because continuous OSA phenotypes have highly skewed distribution, which can increase the chances of identifying false positive associations, we permuted the outcomes 10,000 times (or to convergence according to29) to obtain permutation p-values as implemented in the “lmPerm” R package (Version 2.1.0). The permutation p-values of the association of a microbe with an OSA phenotype is the proportion of permutations in which the p-value was lower than the initial (unpermuted) p-value. We applied FDR correction to the permutation p-values to account for multiple testing. A total of 20% of the data was held out as test set and BWAS were calculated based on the remaining 80% data for phylogenetic and functional readouts. It was then assessed on the held-out test set. The BWAS was performed independently for both the phylogenetic (BpWAS) and functional (BfWAS) composition. All results are reported in Supplementary Data File 1, with Fig. 1 reporting only associations where all models (Model 1–3) passed p-value <0.05 and Model 3 passed FDR <0.1, for any of the OSA phenotypes.

We used the estimated associations from summary statistics of metabolomics analysis of OSA in the HCHS/SOL and gene expression analyses of OSA phenotypes from other datasets that were previously performed and published30 (see Supplementary Table S4 for population characteristics). Briefly, metabolomic profiling of serum from fasting blood samples from 3972 HCHS/SOL participants were collected and metabolomic profiling was conducted at Metabolon. A previously reported meta-analysis of gene expression associations with measures of sleep disordered breathing and hypoxemia was performed (see Supplementary Table S5 for population characteristics) for the Framingham Offspring Study (FOS26; N = 571) and the Multi-Ethnic Study of Atherosclerosis (MESA27; N = 580). See Supplementary Methods for detailed description of all steps.

The HCHS/SOL was approved by the institutional review boards (IRBs) at each field centre, where all participants gave written informed consent in their preferred language (Spanish/English), and by the Non-Biomedical IRB at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, to the HCHS/SOL Data Coordinating Centre. All IRBs approving the study are: Non-Biomedical IRB at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill. Chapel Hill, NC; Einstein IRB at the Albert Einstein College of Medicine of Yeshiva University. Bronx, NY; IRB at Office for the Protection of Research Subjects (OPRS), University of Illinois at Chicago. Chicago, IL; Human Subject Research Office, University of Miami. Miami, FL; Institutional Review Board of San Diego State University, San Diego, CA. The study reported here was approved by the Mass General Brigham IRB under protocol #2010P001765.

Three main OSA outcomes available for the GOLD cohort (REI, AvgSpO2, SpO290) were evaluated in this study. Table 1 summarizes the distribution of the outcome measurements (along with the main covariates) in this cohort (see Supplementary Table S3 for summary statistics of additional covariates used).Table 1Summary statistics of outcomes and Model1 covariates in GOLD study.FMOverall(N = 659)(N = 458)(N = 1117)REI Mean (SD)4.55 (7.57)9.09 (14.2)6.41 (11.0) Median [Min, Max]1.82 [0, 70.3]3.93 [0, 116]2.59 [0, 116] Missing1 (0.2%)1 (0.2%)2 (0.2%)AvgSpO2 Mean (SD)96.6 (0.679)96.2 (1.19)96.4 (0.936) Median [Min, Max]96.8 [92.3, 97.9]96.6 [81.5, 97.7]96.7 [81.5, 97.9]SpO290 Mean (SD)0.426 (1.19)1.04 (3.07)0.676 (2.19) Median [Min, Max]0.0374 [0, 14.8]0.0812 [0, 29.9]0.0532 [0, 29.9]Age Mean (SD)51.0 (10.9)51.1 (10.8)51.0 (10.9) Median [Min, Max]52.0 [18.0, 74.0]51.0 [18.0, 75.0]52.0 [18.0, 75.0]Centre Bronx224 (34.0%)108 (23.6%)332 (29.7%) Chicago183 (27.8%)147 (32.1%)330 (29.5%) Miami90 (13.7%)87 (19.0%)177 (15.8%) San Diego162 (24.6%)116 (25.3%)278 (24.9%)REI–Respiratory Event Index; AvgSpO2–average oxyhaemoglobin saturation during sleep; and SpO290–percent sleep time with oxyhaemoglobin saturation <90%.

We performed Bacterial-Wide Association Study (BWAS) to detect associations of gut bacteria (measured via metagenomics, see Materials and Methods), with OSA phenotypes (Table 2, Supplementary Data file 1) in the GOLD cohort. In total, 3 statistical models were tested with each successive model accounting for additional factors that can affect either the participants’ microbial composition or OSA-related phenotypes (such as hypertension, diabetes, and obesity; see Methods & Supplementary Methods). After accounting for multiple testing, bacteria from the Lachnospira, Kingella, Actinomyces and Eubacterium genera were associated with one or more OSA phenotypes in the GOLD cohort (Table 2, Fig. 2a, Supplementary Data file 1; associated is defined as p-value<0.05 for Models 1–3, and FDR<0.1 for Model 3), with very large effect sizes for all but the Eubacterium species. The effect sizes are related to the relative abundance of bacteria. These are informative when comparing results across association models.Table 2Significant OSA-associated bacteria.BacteriaPhenotypeModel3p-value/effect sizeModel3FDRPrimary analysis: species levelActinomyces graevenitzii (Species)AvgSpO2<1e-6−3.73e3<1e-6Actinomyces graevenitzii (Species)REI<1e-64.61e4<1e-6Actinomyces graevenitzii (Species)SpO290<1e-61.62e40.014Secondary analysis: family and genus levelsActinomycetaceae (Family)AvgSpO20.00316−5.60e20.091Lachnospira (Genus)AvgSpO2<1e-6−1.67e4<1e-6Eubacterium (Genus)AvgSpO25e-5−7.670.012Kingella (Genus)REI0.000361.56e60.065Eubacterium (Genus)SpO2903e-521.880.051Bacteria enriched for the OSA-related phenotypes (REI–Respiratory Event Index; AvgSpO2–average oxyhaemoglobin saturation during sleep; and SpO290–percent sleep time with oxyhaemoglobin saturation <90%) in the GOLD cohort detected in a BWAS threshold of: p-value<0.05 for Models 1–3, and FDR<0.1 for Model3. See Supplementary Table S2 for complete covariate list of each model and Supplementary Table S3 for the results of these associations in all models. See Supplementary data file 1 for complete associations list. The top section is for the species taxonomic level, while the bottom section is for the Family and Genus taxonomic levels.Fig. 2OSA-associated bacteria are enriched for opportunistic anaerobic pathogens. (a) Bacteria genera enriched for the OSA-related phenotypes (REI, MinSpO2, AvgSpO2) and their overlaps, in the GOLD cohort detected in a BWAS threshold of: p-value<0.05 for Models 1–3, and FDR<0.1 for Model 3 (b) Co-occurring bacterial communities as uncovered by hierarchical clustering of bacterial phylogeny across participants (performed for all bacteria that passed a threshold of: p-value<0.05 for Models 1–3 in BWAS). (c) Number of functions enriched in association with OSA phenotypes in the GOLD cohort, and their overlap. Functions are included if they had p-value<0.05 in Models 1–3, and FDR<0.1 in Model 3. See Supplementary Table S2 for complete covariate list of each model.

Over 70% of the BWAS enriched bacteria are known to be either obligatory or facultative anaerobic (Fig. 2a; Supplementary Data file 1; for the Eubacterium genus there are no data available for the species reported here), and all are opportunistic pathogens (see31, 32, 33 for clinical examples of pathogenicity). Interestingly, with the exception of Eubacteria (belonging to the Clostridium order), the OSA-associated anaerobic bacteria did not belong to any of the major anaerobic bacteria families/orders known to be present in human gut (Bifidobacterium, Bacteroides, Finegoldia, Fusobacterium, Prevotella, and Veillonella34). We next sought to explore whether the identified OSA-associated bacteria tend to co-occur. To do that, we performed hierarchical clustering only on species that were significantly associated to any of the OSA phenotypes in all three models. Such analysis uncovered several bacterial communities that tended to co-occur in individual participants and that are correlated to OSA (Fig. 2b). These communities include both intra-family species (such as multiple co-occurring strains of Actinomyces or Streptococcus; Fig. 2b) as well as several inter-family genera (e.g., Stomatobaculum with Lachnoanaerobaculum; Fig. 2c).

We converted the bacterial abundance for each participant into bacterial gene content abundance termed here “functional profile” (using PICRUSt235; see Methods & Supplementary Methods). This approach disregards the bacterial phylogenetic identity and instead focuses on the bacterial functions. Similar to the phylogenetic BWAS, Bacterial-Wide Functional Association Study (BWfAS) uncovered multiple functions associated with OSA phenotypes (Fig. 2c, Supplementary Table S7).

Next, we performed pathway analysis (using KEGG; see Supplementary Methods) to identify the metabolic pathways to which the OSA-enriched enzymes belong. In agreement with our observation that the OSA-associated bacteria tend to be anaerobic, we discovered signatures of various anaerobic-related pathways (Fig. 3). These included pathways responsible for increasing the availability of simple sugars by degradation of complex ones36, 37, 38 (such as “Starch and Sucrose metabolism”; Fig. 3a; Supplementary Table S6), pathways for increasing the intake of carbohydrates39, 40, 41, 42(such as “Transporters”; Fig. 3a; Supplementary Table S6), and pathways for utilizing the sugars in well-known anaerobic carbohydrate and energy metabolism pathways43 (such as “Glycolysis”, and “Non-oxidative Pentose phosphate pathway”; Fig. 3, Supplementary Table S6). In addition, we detected pathways specifically indicative of anaerobic metabolism in the OSA-associated bacteria (the “Thiamine salvage pathway”44; Fig. 3a; Supplementary Table S6). Finally, multiple bacterial communication and biofilm related functions were enriched as well (Fig. 3a, Supplementary Table S6).Fig. 3Anaerobic-related functions are enriched in OSA-associated bacteria. (a) List of OSA-enriched KEGG modules with anaerobic-related function (b) A graphical representation of the Glycolysis pathway with the OSA over-represented enzymes depicted in blue (K00886: polyphosphate glucokinase; K01810: glucose-6-phosphate isomerase) – see Supplementary Table S8 for all enzyme names.

Next, we investigated whether the OSA-associated bacteria and microbial function can be used to construct a Bacterial Risk Score (BRS) for OSA. We used the results from BWAS to construct several risk score models to estimate the contribution of bacteria for OSA risk classification. The models used were: (i) the covariates alone (ii) the bacteria/function alone, and (iii) combined bacteria and covariates (Table 3). LASSO34 was used to select variables for each model.Table 3Performance of Bacterial Risk Score based on phylogeny and function of OSA-associated bacteria.CovariatesPhylogeneticFunctionalBacteriaCovariates & bacteriaFunctionCovariates & functionREI >15/hour0.610.530.630.580.63REI >30/hour0.600.550.770.630.70Performance (AUC) of risk score models trained on covariates alone (see Supplementary Table S2); BWAS-significant bacteria alone; BWAS-significant functions alone; or the combined covariates and bacteria/function. All models employed LASSO with the model features derived from BWAS with threshold of p-value <0.05 for Models1-3. See Supplementary Table S2 for complete covariate list of each model. The AUCs listed were computed over the held-out test set which represents 20% of the analytic sample.

We show that including OSA-enriched bacterial phylogeny as well as OSA-enriched function in prediction models with clinical covariates can significantly improve the classification ability of OSA relative to clinical covariates alone, with the best performance observed for severe OSA prediction (REI >30). Specifically, the Bacterial Phylogenetic Risk Score (BpWAS) improves AUC to 0.77 for severe OSA classification, compared to 0.6 for model that uses clinical covariates alone. Bacterial Functional Risk Score (BfWAS) improves the AUC of 0.7 for severe OSA on the held-out test set.

Most bacteria require the availability of carbon and nitrogen in the environment as well as energy source for successful growth. The bacterial function in bacteria associated with OSA was enriched in carbohydrate metabolism and anaerobic energy production (Fig. 3), demonstrating the sources of carbon and of energy. The source of nitrogen for commensal bacteria is mainly amino acids. Bacteria can use amino acids either as energy sources, nitrogen sources or both. We used the available serum metabolomics data from GOLD parent cohort (HCHS/SOL – previously reported in30; Fig. 4) to compare amino acids and their derivatives in individuals with and without OSA (Fig. 4a and b).Fig. 4Amino-acid homeostasis is perturbed in individuals with OSA, yet the host metabolism is unchanged. (a + b) Abundance of amino acids and their derivatives in OSA. Grey indicates that the metabolite was not measured in our assay, arrows indicate upregulation (blue) or downregulation (red) is associated with the OSA group (a) Stickland reactions and their products that allow oxidation–reduction reaction in paired amino acids to extract energy in anaerobic conditions. No enrichment in the products is associated with OSA (b) Amino acids metabolized via the central metabolism and their possible final products. Note the depletion in Glycine and Glutamine (c) Meta-analysis results for gene expression in genes participating in Glycine production and consumption pathways (inset) in OSA patients. The x axis represents effect size as measured by beta from regression analysis (see Methods and & Supplementary Methods). Statistically significant but extremely small change in gene expression is observed for SHMT1 and SRR (blue color and asterisk).

First, we studied the possible utilization of amino acids as an energy source by anaerobic bacteria. Energy can be extracted from pairs of amino acids via coupled oxidation–reduction reactions (Stickland reactions45; Fig. 4a). Of the 5 Stickland reactions products present in our dataset, none was enriched in OSA and 2 were slightly depleted (Fig. 4a), providing no evidence for the utilization of amino acids as energy sources for anaerobic bacteria. Next, we examined the utilization of amino acids as a nitrogen source via the central metabolism. We detected significant reduction in the glycine (β = −1.08; p-value = 8e-4; FDR = 0.057) and glutamine (β = −0.8; p-value = 3e-3; FDR = 0.092) amino acids in individuals with OSA compared to healthy individuals (Fig. 4b), and significant but very slight increase in the aspartate and glutamate amino acids.

The finding that glycine is depleted in individuals with OSA, prompted us to investigate whether the changes were due to differences in gene expression. Glycine is constantly consumed and produced in humans, therefore we studied whether there was a change in production or consumption in individuals with OSA. We utilized a previously reported meta-analysis of gene expression data in association with measures of OSA46 (see Supplementary Methods) to look at all the genes in glycine metabolism pathways (Fig. 4c). We discovered no significant changes in the expression of any of the genes in association with OSA measures (with the exception of the SHMT1 and SRR genes, that were statistically significant but with Effect sizes <1.01). Lastly, throughout this study we adjusted for diet in all our models (Supplementary Table S2) and such adjustment for dietary variables did not change the association of OSA with the microbiome.

We present the largest study to date of gut microbiome and OSA in 1117 Hispanic/Latino individuals. OSA is a disorder that leads to tissue hypoxia, i.e., reduced level of oxygen in various tissues. Here we report that this reduction is associated with a pronounced change in the microbiome. The detected OSA-related bacteria are atypical anaerobes that seem to be adapted to these low-oxygen conditions. Due to carefully collected information on lifestyle factors such as education and diet, and on known OSA comorbidities hypertension, obesity, and diabetes, our primary findings are OSA-specific. All of the bacteria that were significantly associated with measures of OSA in this study belong to the orders/families such as Lachnospira47 and Actinomyces48 reported previously in smaller studies. All of the bacteria identified in this study were previously reported to be opportunistic pathogens. For example, Actinomyces is known to be involved in genitourinary infections, chronic granulomatosis, and lung abscesses33,49, 50, 51; Kingella is a known pathogen in young children involved in septic arthritis, pharyngeal inflammation, etc.52, 53, 54, 55; and Lachnospira is reported in multiple metabolic diseases, chronic kidney disease, primary sclerosing cholangitis and more56 (we note that for Lachnospira, there are also reports of possible beneficial activity).

An analysis of bacterial enzyme content uncovered 49 significant associations between OSA phenotype severity and microbiome enzymatic function. Many of these OSA-related bacterial functions were involved in processes related to oxygen-poor environments. While the polysaccharide degradation and sugar importer functions point towards carbohydrates as the main source of biomass for bacterial growth, multiple non-oxidative energy metabolism pathways such as the “Reductive pentose phosphate pathway” indicate that fermentation, rather than oxidative phosphorylation, is the probable energy-derivation mechanism for these bacteria.

We next studied the possible utilization of amino acids as a bacterial nitrogen source. We discovered that circulating plasma levels of glycine and glutamine were significantly reduced in individuals with OSA (Fig. 4b). This was surprising since both glycine and glutamine can be efficiently produced in human cells from other amino acids. Using results from a gene expression association analysis with OSA phenotypes, we examined whether there was a change in OSA-related gene expression in glycine production or consumption pathways (Fig. 4c). We detected no significant changes in any of these pathways.

Glycine is considered a “semi-essential” amino acid and glycine dysregulation can cause lethargy, weak muscle tone, breathing problems and others,57 mirroring many of OSA-related phenotypes. Non-genetic glycine deficiencies are observed in individuals with diabetes and other metabolic disorders,57 also without clear mechanistic explanation. Here we show that in individuals with OSA, similar reduction of glycine levels is detected, but based on gene expression and diet data, we conclude that the production or consumption of glycine by the human host is unchanged. Taken together these findings point towards the OSA microbiome as a possible consumer of the amino acids. This suggests a hypothetical model for the contribution of microbiome to the pathophysiology of OSA (Fig. 5a), where a microbiome enriched in anaerobic opportunistic pathogens is established in individuals with OSA, following the establishment of oxygen-poor environment; it uses mainly carbohydrates as a biomass source and for energy production via anaerobic fermentation. The microbiome then depletes certain important amino acids required for its growth, and the lack of these amino acids may affect multiple host physiologic functions such as muscle tone, exacerbating the OSA condition.Fig. 5Hypothetical mechanism of bacterial effects on OSA pathophysiology. (a) OSA microbial communities are comprised of bacteria adapted for anaerobic conditions. The bacterial functions are enriched in polysaccharide degradation and sugar import, which are used for biomass and anaerobic energy extraction. In addition, the anaerobic metabolism depletes certain amino acids from the host, while producing secondary metabolites and vitamins. (b) Microbiome is suggested to be another component in OSA pathophysiology. Changes in the microbiome may be the result of OSA-related hypoxic conditions, and exacerbate OSA co-morbidities such as glucose and metabolic dysfunction; however, the microbiome may also contribute to the disease aetiology, for example through effects on protein levels and upper airway muscle function. In the future, the microbiome can be used for diagnostic and possibly as a target of interventions.

The strengths of our study include large sample sizes and the objective assessment of OSA phenotypes. The analyses utilized a wide array of relevant clinical information including demographics, lifestyle, diet, and comorbidities. The microbial profiling methodology (metagenomics), allowed for in-depth characterization of the associated bacteria reaching strain-level specificity. Finally, we were able to test some of the hypotheses formulated in this work. Some of the limitations of this study are: OSA phenotypes were measured via a Type 3 home sleep apnoea test rather than the gold-standard PSG which may be somewhat less accurate. PSG would also allow identification of additional sleep phenotypes such as sleep fragmentation, repetitive arousals, sympathetic over activity, and hypercapnia,58 which may interact with the microbiome as well. In addition, OSA phenotypes were measured before the microbiome (visit 1 vs visit 2; 6 yrs on average), and thus the severity of OSA might have been different at the time of microbiome sampling. We mitigated this via including only individuals with no significant weight change between visits. During this time period changes in diet may have occurred which may influence results. Another limitation is incomplete information about OSA treatment. At the baseline exam, HCHS/SOL participants were asked “Have you been prescribed a CPAP or BIPAP machine, or a device to wear in your mouth to treat your sleep apnoea ?”. Only ∼1% of our study participants (13 people) reported having prescribed such treatment, and there is no information about use of such prescriptions and adherence. While the number of these potentially-treated participants is very low, their inclusion may have somewhat weakened the statistical associations. Similarly, it is possible that associations were weakened because some participants may have begun OSA treatment after undergoing their sleep study. Due to the lack of microbiome data from other cohort studies, these findings were not verified in additional cohorts; since the metabolomics data was acquired from blood samples and the microbiome from stool samples, there may be a discrepancy in the local metabolite concentration; given the observational design, causality cannot be assigned to the associations reported here. Next, since the primary findings were from data on a single cohort, the generalizability of this study needs to be verified in the future in other populations. Finally, due to the cross-sectional nature of the study, the associations between OSA and gut bacteria reported here may not be causal, but incidental. Therefore, prospective and interventional studies are necessary.

In the future, the anaerobic nature of the OSA microbiome can be utilized for diagnostic purposes (Fig. 5b; e.g., swabs grown anaerobically on petri dishes; Bacterial Risk Scores in large cohorts even if sleep phenotypes were not measured). In addition, possible antibiotic interventions (e.g., to clear the disease microbiome) and metabolic interventions (e.g., glycine food supplements) as well as their combinations should also be considered.

ME and TS devised and developed the models and framework. ME, YiZ, YuZ, and TS performed all the analyses, and summarized results in tables and figures. ME and TS conceptualized and drafted the manuscript. TS supervised the work for this manuscript. BY, YK, PCZ, MDG, EB, MLD, JC, SR, RDB and RK designed data collection and/or sample selection, formulated best-practices for data analysis, and participated in the manuscript preparation. ME and TS have directly accessed and verified the underlying data reported in the manuscript. All authors had full access to all the data in the study and accept responsibility to submit for publication.

In accordance with participants informed consent HCHS/SOL data are available through data use agreement in dbGaP according to the study-specific accessions: phs000810. GOLD microbiome data from the samples described in this study have been deposited in QIITA, ID 11666, and EMBL-EBI ENA, ERP117287. HCHS/SOL metabolomics data are available via data use agreement with the HCHS/SOL Data Coordinating Centre at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, see collaborators website: https://sites.cscc.unc.edu/hchs/. Summary statistics from gene expression association analysis in MESA and FOS are at https://github.com/tamartsi/SDB_gene_expression_associations. Summary statistics from association analysis if OSA with metabolites in HCHS/SOL are available as supplementary materials here https://www.nature.com/articles/s41598-022-26321-9#Sec17. All data generated or analyzed during this study are included in this published article and its supplementary information file. The code used in the analysis is freely available at: https://github.com/elgartmi/OSA_Microbiome.

PCZ reports volunteer service as a president of the World Sleep Society. RK reports funding from the National Institute of Health (NIH). SR reports receiving consulting fees from Eli Lilly and Apnimed, related to sleep apnoea protocols but not related to microbiome. RDB reports receiving funding from the NIH. YK reports receiving funding from the National Institute of Nursing Research (R01NR016838). MLD reports receiving funding from the NIH with payments made to the institution. EB, BY, JC, MG, ME, TS, YiZ, and YuZ report no competing interests.

SwiftC.L.BrownJ.L.SeppäläS.O'MalleyM.A.Co-cultivation of the anaerobic fungus Anaeromyces robustus with Methanobacterium bryantii enhances transcription of carbohydrate active enzymesJ Ind Microbiol Biotechnol469-1020191427143310.1007/s10295-019-02188-031089985

The Hispanic Community Health Study/Study of Latinos is a collaborative study supported by contracts from the 10.13039/100000002National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute (NHLBI) to the 10.13039/100006808University of North Carolina (HHSN268201300001I/N01-HC-65233), 10.13039/100006686University of Miami (HHSN268201300004I/N01-HC- 65234), 10.13039/100007319Albert Einstein College of Medicine (HHSN268201300002I/N01-HC-65235), 10.13039/100008522University of Illinois at Chicago – HHSN268201300003I/N01- HC-65236 Northwestern Univ), and 10.13039/100007099San Diego State University (HHSN268201300005I/N01-HC-65237). The following Institutes/Centres/Offices have contributed to the HCHS/SOL through a transfer of funds to the NHLBI: 10.13039/100006545National Institute on Minority Health and Health Disparities, 10.13039/100000055National Institute on Deafness and Other Communication Disorders, 10.13039/100000072National Institute of Dental and Craniofacial Research, 10.13039/100000062National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases, 10.13039/100000065National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke, NIH Institution-Office of Dietary Supplements. Funding for this work was provided by the 10.13039/100000002National Institutes of Health (R35HL135818, R21HL145425). Support for metabolomics data was graciously provided by the JLH Foundation (Houston, Texas).