© 2024 The Authors. International Wound Journal published by Medicalhelplines.com Inc and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/This is an open access article under the terms of the http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ License, which permits use and distribution in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited, the use is non‐commercial and no modifications or adaptations are made.AbstractCurrent microbiome investigations of patients with pressure ulcers (PU) are mainly based on wound swabs and/or biopsy sequencing, leaving the colonization scenario unclear. Urinary microbiota has been never studied. As a part of the prospective ESCAFLOR study, we studied urinary microbiota of spinal cord injury (SCI) patients with PU without any urinary tract infection at the inclusion, collected at two times (at admission [D0] and after 28 days [D28]) during the patient's care, investigated by 16S rDNA metagenomics next generation sequencing. Subgroup analyses were carried out between patients with wounds showing improved evolution versus stagnated/worsened wounds at D28. Analysis was done using EPISEQ® 16S and R software. Among the 12 studied patients, the urinary microbiota of patients with improved wound evolution at D28 (n = 6) presented a significant decrease of microbial diversity. This modification was associated with the presence of Proteobacteria phylum and an increase of Escherichia‐Shigella (p = 0.005), as well as the presence of probiotic anaerobic bacteria Lactobacillus and Bifidobacterium. In contrast, Proteus abundance was significantly increased in urine of patients with stagnated/worsened wound evolution (n = 6) (p = 0.003). This study proposes urinary microbiota as a complementary factor indirectly associated with the wound evolution and patient cure. It opens new perspectives for further investigations based on multiple body microbiome comparison to describe the complete scenario of the transmission dynamics of wound‐colonizing microorganisms.anaerobic bacteriaEPISEQ® 16Smetagenomics next‐generation sequencingpressure ulcer

Investigating the relationship between the wound microbiota and other microbiota (e.g., gut, oral and urinary) could reveal the origin and dynamics of wounds microbial colonization, as well as the role of the microbiota in wound evolution and healing. In a previous study,

we conducted a 3‐year prospective study of wound microbiota based on 16s rRNA metagenomic next‐generation sequencing (mNGS) in SCI patients presenting PU in the South of France. Investigating the urine samples of the PU patients could reveal the association of urinary microbiota in chronic wounds evolution and patients cure. As it has never been investigated, in this study we compared the urine microbiota composition of these SCI patients collected at two visits: hospital admission (D0) and day 28 (D28).

A total of 73 urine samples were collected from 37 SCI patients with decubitus PU aged between 31 and 89 years old, recruited at the Centre Mutualiste Neurologique Propara (Montpellier, France), between 2015 and 2017. Clinical data and sampling were collected on two visits: admission (D0) and D28, including neurological assessment, nutritional status (body mass index and serum albumin level) and wound assessment. Only urine samples from patients participating in both visits were analysed by a mNGS approach. This study was approved by the local ethics committee (South Mediterranean III; N°2014.04.01bis).

then quantified by Qubit™ fluorometer using a Qubit dsDNA High Sensitivity Assay Kit (Life Technology, Villebon‐sur‐Yvette, France). Metagenomics analysis was performed following the standard Illumina 16s rDNA‐based library preparation procedure as previously described,

EPISEQ® 16S is a fully integrated web‐based software application, available in the bioMérieux EPISEQ platform. This software characterizes the genetic diversity in microbial communities based on the 16S rRNA gene. The processing workflow combines all amplicon sequences identified in the different samples (after a quality control and filtering pre‐processing workflow) and outputs a table describing the content of each sample in terms of microbial diversity at all taxonomic ranks. It clusterizes all amplicons, assigns a taxonomy to each cluster (OTUs [operational taxonomic units]), calculates and normalizes abundance of each taxon in each sample and consolidates these abundances through the taxonomy. It also computes some microbial diversity indicators (alpha and beta diversity measures). The workflow is mainly based on the QIIME v1 toolbox, an open‐source bioinformatics toolbox for performing microbiome analyses and particularly the RDP Classifier (v2.12) and SILVA (v138) database for OTUs taxonomic assignment of the representative sequence foreach cluster.

These analyses were performed using the EPISEQ® 16S software. First, to account for different sequencing depth between samples, a normalization procedure was applied (DESeq2 procedure) leading to normalized read counts instead of initial read counts. The alpha‐diversity was evaluated with abundance‐based coverage estimator (ACE) and Shannon index for species richness and species evenness respectively. The beta‐diversity was calculated using Bray–Curtis dissimilarity and graphically represented with a principal coordinate analysis (PCoA). The global group effect based on the beta‐diversity values was tested using an Adonis test, a permutational multivariate analysis of variance. Differential abundance testing was made following the DESeq2 package procedure.

The evolution of alpha diversity was evaluated computing the individual differences between indices at D28 minus indices at D0. A comparison between data obtained from improved versus stagnated/worsened wounds was performed using a Mann–Whitney test. The evolution of beta‐diversity was evaluated by introduction of the variable Visit into the PERMANOVA model while considering the paired samples characteristics into consideration. The PCoA evolution graph was modelled considering both D0 and D28 visits, then the obtained scores were subtracted (respecting the patient follow‐up). Each dot in the plot represents one patient. The patients near to the origin of the graph had similar microbiota at D28 and D0 while the ones with more distant dots had the greatest modification between the two visits.

From 37 included patients, only patients sampled in both visits (D0 and D28) with >1 ng/μL initial DNA quantity extracted from samples were selected for urinary microbiota analysis (Figure S1, Table S1). Finally, 24 urine samples from nine males and three females for a total of 12 patients were used for microbiota investigation (Table 1). Noteworthy, none of the patients had any urinary tract infections at inclusion. Based on wound evolution at D28, patients were classified into two groups: (i) improved and (ii) stagnated/worsened.

Note: Quantitative variables are expressed as median (Q1, Q3) and qualitative variables as absolute frequency (relative frequency in %). The statistical tests are either Student or Wilcoxon for quantitative variables and Chi‐squared or Fisher's exact for qualitative variables.

All included samples were generated between 38 146 and 63 707 reads (mean = 50 509) in which at least 60% of reads were successfully classified. EPISEQ®‐16S pipeline identified six bacterial phyla including Proteobacteria (57%), Firmicutes (29.5%), Actinobacteriota (13%), Bacteroidota (0.4%), Cyanobacteria (0.12%) and Fusobacteriota (0.004%). Proteobacteria, Firmicutes, Actinobacteria and Bacteroidota were detected in urine from patients in both improved and stagnated/worsened wound evolution groups. Fusobacteriota was detected only in patients belonging to stagnated/worsened wound evolution, whereas Cyanobacteria was detected only in patients with improved PU.

The six bacterial phyla included 69 genera; 38 genera were detected in both categories, 23 in patients with improved wounds only, and eight in patients with stagnated/worsened PU only. Escherichia‐Shigella was the most abundant genus (31.6%) followed by Actinotignum (8%), Proteus (7.8%), Lactobacillus (6.6%), Pseudomonas (6.2%), Klebsiella (6.2%), Veillonella (6.13%), Enterococcus (6%), Staphylococcus (3.3%), Aerococcus (3%) and the remaining 59 genera were <2.5% of abundance (Figure 1, Figure S2).

Evolution of the urinary microbiota of spinal cord injury patients according to the evolution of their pressure ulcers (PU) at day 28 (D28). (A) Phyla profiles detected in urine of patients classified as improved PU at D28 (blue) or worsened/stagnated wounds (orange). Firmicutes was the most abundant phylum, followed by Proteobacteria, Actinobacteria and Bacteroidota. Fusobacteriota was only identified in urine of patients with worsened/stagnated wounds, whereas Cyanobacteria was only detected in urine of patients with improved PU. (B) Comparison of the alpha‐diversity (Shannon index evolution) of the urinary microbiota between patients with improved or stagnated/worsened PU evolution at D28. (C) Comparison of the Proteobacteria evolution in the urinary microbiota between patients with improved or stagnated/worsened PU at D28.

Among the six phyla detected, Bacteroidota was significantly associated with patients belonging to the improved wounds group at D28 (p = 0.001), while no significant association have been observed with other phyla. Moreover, a significant higher bacterial alpha‐diversity was observed at D0 in this group, supported by a significant Shannon index (evenness measure, p = 0.032). However, we observed no significant difference in ACE index (richness) corresponding to the beta‐diversity. From the 60 bacterial genera detected at D0, the presence of Staphylococcus, Aerococcus, Citrobacter, Bacteroides and Bifidobacterium was significantly higher in the group of patients with an improved wound at D28 (p < 0.001, <0.001, 0.005, 0.034 and 0.034 respectively), while Proteus (p = 0.003) and Providencia (p = 0.024) were significantly higher in patients with stagnated/worsened PU. Finally, Lactobacillus and Anaerococcus were only detected in urine from patients with improved wounds (Table 2, Table S2).

Among these six phyla, 59 genera were identified in which Streptococcus, Lactobacillus Bifidobacterium, Propionimicrobium, Novosphingobium, Vibrionimonas and Facklamia were detected with a high and significant abundance in urine from patients with improved wounds at D28 (p < 0.001, <0.001, <0.001, 0.01, 0.02, 0.03 and 0.05 respectively). Cutibacterium, Enterobacter, Proteus, Vibrio and Corynebacterium were detected with a significantly higher abundance in patients with stagnated/worsened PU at D28 (p < 0.001, 0.01, 0.02, 0.02 and 0.03 respectively). Finally, Pluralibacter (p = 0.01) and other uncultured bacteria were only detected in urine from patients with stagnated/worsened wounds.

A decrease in evenness (Shannon index) in urinary microbiota was observed (p = 0.052) regardless of PU evolution. However, evenness was particularly decreased in patients with improved wounds between D0 and D28, whereas this evolution was stable or slightly increased in patients with stagnated/worsened wounds. Regarding beta‐diversity, the PERMANOVA test highlighted a significant evolution of the urinary microbiota between the two visits (p = 0.017), but this evolution was not significantly linked to clinical evolution of the wounds (p = 0.134). Nevertheless, a trend can be observed on the PCoA evolution graph (Figure 2). The patients with improved PUs showed the biggest modification of their microbiota between the two visits, while most patients with stagnated/worsened wounds had a stable microbiota between visits (Figure 2). Patients with improved PUs harboured a significant increase of Proteobacteria phylum at D28 (p = 0.0056), of Bifidobacterium (p = 0.008) and Escherichia‐Shigella (p = 0.039) abundance at genus level, as well as an increase of Lactobacillus abundance (p = 0.06). In contrast, no significant modification of urinary microbiota was noted in the group of patients with stagnated/worsened wounds (Figure 2, Table S2). Moreover, a notable change in Proteus abundance was observed between the two groups at D0 and D28 with a significant increase of this genus in patients with stagnated/worsened PUs (p = 0.003).

Principal coordinate analysis of the beta‐diversity of the urinary microbiota at genus level. Patients with an improved evolution of their pressure ulcers at D28 (green dots) have more changes in their urinary microbiota at D28 than patients and those with stagnated/worsened wounds (red dots) resulting in a beta‐diversity significantly (p = 0.017) related to evolution between the two visits.

As we have already documented the wound microbiota of PU patients (10), here, we investigated, for the first time of our knowledge, the urinary microbiota of PU patients collected at hospital admission and after 28 days of care management according to the wound evolution. A remarkable decrease of the urine microbial diversity was observed over the 28 days and significantly associated with improved wounds (p = 0.017). The reduction of bacterial diversity at D28 was associated with the urinary colonization of Proteobacteria phylum and an increase of the abundance of Escherichia‐Shigella (p = 0.039) at genus level in patients with improved wound evolution (Figure 2, Table S2). Interestingly, we also noted an increase of Proteobacteria when comparing the PU wound microbiota evolution.

The importance of this phylum and the exact role played by the Escherichia‐Shigella must be investigated notably due to the infected role of these bacteria in the urinary tract. However, the urinary asymptomatic carriage of these bacteria has been also established, with a mucosa remaining inert despite large numbers of bacteria in urine.

Interestingly, the favourable PU evolution was associated with a significant increase of anaerobic bacteria, notably Bifidobacterium and Lactobacillus in urinary microbiota of SCI patients. These two genera were also detected in wound microbiota of patients with improved PU evolution.

Indeed, the probiotic activity of Lactobacillus and Bifidobacterium promotes the healthy microbiome, and the H2O2‐producing Lactobacillus is involved in urinary tract microbial colonization control and associated with vaginal eubiosis or healthy microbiome.

We could not exclude that the origin of these Lactobacillus was the vaginal microbiota, as among patients with improved wounds, 2/3 were women. In addition to Proteus, the detection of Escherichia‐Shigella and probiotic anaerobic bacteria in both urinary and wound microbiota should clarify the link between these ecosystems and their involvement in the wound evolution.

Due to the limitations of bacterial DNA extractions as well as the low data quantity generated by mNGS, our investigation was conducted on a small panel of patients after data validation, that requires more technical investigation for DNA quantity and microbial genome enrichment to improve the microbiome detection in urine samples.

This study highlighted for the first‐time a continuum between urinary and PU microbiota in SCI patients and their impact on wound evolution and healing. We provided additional insight about the indirect involvement of the urinary microbiota in wound evolution, as well as the partial history of wound‐colonizing microorganisms. This pilot study should open avenues for further investigations comparing different body microbiomes to establish the transmission dynamics of wound‐colonizing microorganisms. Comparing wound, stool and urine microbiota should provide additional information to complete the scenario of this translocation dynamic, as well as on infection according to the microbial origin.

The authors have to thank the Nîmes University Hospital for its structural, human and financial support through the award obtained by our team during the internal call for tenders ‘Thématiques phares’. We thank Sarah Kabani for her editorial assistance, Chloé Louche and Violaine Lynaert for data collection, Camile Briant for data management.