© 2023 The Authors. Cancer Reports published by Wiley Periodicals LLC.https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article under the terms of the http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ License, which permits use, distribution and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.AbstractBackgroundThe growing complexity of cancer has made it a significant concern in the medical community. Although cancer research has advanced, it is still challenging to create new effective medications due to the limitations and side effects of existing treatment strategies. These are enforcing the development of some alternative drugs from natural compounds with fewer drawbacks and side effects.AimTherefore, this review aims to provide up‐to‐date, crucial, and all‐encompassing data on esculetin's anticancer activity, including all relevant molecular and cellular processes based on in vivo and in vitro investigations.ResultsAccording to the literature review, esculetin is available in nature and is effective against 16 different types of cancer. The general mechanism shown by esculetin is modulating signaling cascades and its related pathways, like cell proliferation, cell growth, autophagy, apoptosis, necrosis, inflammation, angiogenesis, metastasis, invasion, and DNA damage. Nanoformulation of esculetin improves this natural product's efficacy by improving water solubility. Esculetin's synergistic effects with both natural substances and conventional treatments have been shown, and this method aids in reversing resistance mechanisms by modulating resistance‐related proteins. In addition, it has fewer side effects on humans than other phytochemicals and standard drugs with some good pharmacokinetic features.ConclusionTherefore, until standard chemotherapeutics are available in pharmaceutical markets, esculetin should be used as a therapeutic drug against various cancer types.anticancer mechanismcancer typesesculetinpharmacokineticsynergisticsource-schema-version-number2.0cover-dateJanuary 2024details-of-publishers-convertorConverter:WILEY_ML3GV2_TO_JATSPMC version:6.3.6 mode:remove_FC converted:25.01.2024

Despite the advances in research, developing new effective medicines is still challenging due to limitations like—side effects like hematopoietic system toxicity, neurotoxicity, cardiotoxicity, nephrotoxicity, oral mucositis, and various gastrointestinal problems.

Various medicinal plants have been used as alternative therapies for cancer patients. Because of their chemical variety, natural products have been studied for over 50 years for their ability to fight cancer. This means that using recently identified chemicals derived from plants may offer an innovative and reliable therapeutic ingredient for healing a broad range of human cancers.

One such natural compound that has recently gained attention for its potential anticancer properties is esculetin. Esculetin is a phytoestrogen found in a wide variety of herbs and plants. Several studies have investigated the possible anticancer activity of esculetin in various human malignancies such as breast,

Although esculetin has been the subject of several in vitro, in vivo, and pre‐clinical trials, including a wide variety of human malignancies, a comprehensive review with mechanistic insight has not been reviewed yet. Therefore, we aimed to highlight the overall anticancer effects of esculetin against numerous human malignancies, including its relation with structure and anticancer perspectives in different study models. Moreover, we targeted unraveling synergistic mechanisms with other natural products and traditional drugs currently used, overcoming resistance patterns and existing drug resistance activities, and developing nano‐strategies for better efficacies, with some additional information, including a pharmacokinetics study and toxicity profile. Therefore, the information that will be covered here will encourage potent scholars to design novel and potential drugs to fight against cancerous neoplasm.

Esculetin can be biologically synthesized from Escherichia coli. Escherichia coli expressing the genes F6′H (encoding feruloyl CoA 6′ hydroxylase) and 4CL (encoding 4‐coumarate CoA: ligase) were grown in media containing p‐coumaric acid, caffeic acid, and ferulic acid, resulting in the synthesis of the coumarins umbelliferone, esculetin, and scopoletin. The summary of esculetin source is shortlisted in Table 1.

Esculetin is known as 6,7‐dihydroxychromen‐2‐one (IUPAC nomenclature) and has the molecular formula C9H6O4. Esculetin is a hydroxycoumarin structurally similar to umbelliferone but has a hydroxy group replacing the hydrogen at position 6. Its metabolite is found in plants and has important roles as an antioxidant and UV filter. There are 13 heavy atoms, 1 covalently bound unit, 66.8 Å2 of topological polar surface area, zero net formal charges, and zero isotope atom counting. This substance has a very heavy molecular weight of 178.14 g/mol. However, the precise value for the mass per molecular unit is 178.0266 g. The chemical structure of esculetin is drawn in Figure 1.

Various experimental studies exhibited that esculetin is effective against human malignancies by regulating various mechanisms, including cell proliferation, cell growth, autophagy, apoptosis, necrosis, inflammation, angiogenesis, metastasis, invasion, and DNA damage (Figure 2). A summary of the chemotherapeutic activity of esculetin against human malignancies is presented in Table 2.

The molecular cascade of esculetin regarding anti‐cancer mechanism against human malignancies. These pathways are interconnected; activating one pathway either accelerates to other or inhibits another mechanism. The ultimate goal is to control carcinogenic pathways.

Breast cancer is the most common kind of cancer in women. Many investigations uncovered that esculetin has chemotherapeutic activity against this type of cancer. Breast cancer resistance protein (BCRP) and multidrug resistance‐associated protein 2 (MRP2) were affected by esculetin‐7‐O‐Glucoronide and 4‐Methylesculetin‐7‐O‐Glucoronide (1 mg/mL −10 mg/kg), as determined by in vitro and in vivo studies using Caco‐2 cell line and FVB mice, respectively.

Esculetin (0–60 μM) administration was found to induce apoptosis and cytotoxicity via upregulation of p21, p53, caspase‐3, ‐9, and cytC and downregulation of CDK1 and cyclin B1 expression in a separate in vitro study using the MCF‐7, ZR‐75‐1, and MDA‐MB‐231 cell lines.

According to Choi et al CMT‐U27, CF41.mg canine mammary gland tumor cells undergo apoptosis, and G0/G1 and S phase cell cycle arrest when exposed to esculetin at concentrations between 0 and 1 mM, and the expression of the cell death protein caspase‐3 is upregulated by esculetin while the expression of the cell cycle regulators CDK4 and cyclin D1 is downregulated.

In conclusion, it is clear from the current mechanistic investigations of breast cancer that esculetin promotes the overexpression of tumor suppressor genes that can control cell cycle progression. This naturally occurring coumarin chemical also regulates the expression of numerous genes. Esculetin is also capable of inhibiting the growth and spread of malignant cells.

Researchers found that esculetin inhibited the migration and proliferation of HT‐29, SW480, HCT‐116, and Caco‐2 cell lines by downregulating Ki67, N‐cadherin, E‐cadherin, β‐catenin, c‐Myc, cyclin D1, MMP2, MMP7, VEGF, and Wnt3a at concentrations of 0.2, 2, 20, 200, and 2000 μg/mL.

According to another in vitro study, esculetin at 55 μg/mL plays a critical role in inhibiting cancer cell viability and inducing apoptosis by increasing Caspase‐3 and ‐9 activation and the level of reactive oxygen species (ROS) and cyt‐C release while decreasing antiapoptotic protein Bcl‐2 expression.

Using HCT‐116, SW480, LS174T, HCT15, and male nude mice, researchers found that esculetin (10, 30 mg/kg of body weight) decreased the invasion and metastasis, growth, and proliferation of colon cancer cells by downregulating Wnt and Axin2 and reduction of β‐catenin.

Of all the known malignant tumors, liver cancer is notable for its wide variety of manifestations. Chronic liver fibrosis and inflammation are major risk factors for the development of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), which may arise in a number of ways from patient to patient.

Results from an in vivo investigation conducted by Choi et al on male C57BL/6N mice showed that esculetin (0.01/100 g), reduces hypertrophy, lipid accumulation, and inflammation by downregulating Fasn, Dgat2, Pap, Tlr4, Myd88, and lowering TNF‐α, Il6, and MCP‐1.

In vitro study on HepG2 cells and in vivo study on male C57BL/6J mice with esculetin (10, 50, 100 μM, and 200 mg/kg, respectively) showed that esculetin decreased the level of ALP, AST, and ALT as well as serum lipids through increasing Nrf2 signaling

Juan Li et al performed research on SMMC‐7721 cells to estimate the effect of esculetin at 0, 25, 50, 100, 200, and 300 μg/mL concentrations and found that esculetin elevated caspase 9, 3, and Bax and downregulated Bcl‐2, Akt, PI3K, and IGF‐3 to cause apoptosis and limit cell proliferation.

Esculetin inhibited the release of lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) and alanine transaminase (ALT) at concentrations of 5–20 μg/mL, as well as the generation of malondialdehyde (MDA) and alanine aminotransferase (AST) at concentrations of 0.5, 5 mg per kg, and decreased oxidative stress and increased necrosis in male Sprague‐Daw rat.

Esculetin has been shown to cause apoptosis and decrease proliferation and tumor development in both in vitro and in vivo experiments by causing a cell cycle arrest in the S phase, where Bax, caspase‐3, and ‐9 are elevated, and Bcl‐2 is downregulated.

To sum up, activating the death receptor and its downstream pathways and managing oxidative stress by antioxidant‐related enzymes allow esculetin to prevent the proliferation of liver cancer cells. Moreover, this substance controls growth factors and receptors linked to cancer, reducing some signaling pathways and inflammation.

According to GLOBOCAN, leukemia rated fifteenth, and eleventh in terms of cancer incidence and mortality in 2018. On a global scale, men are more affected by leukemia than females. GBD predicts that the worldwide incidence of leukemia rose by 26% between 2005 and 2015.

20 μM dosage of esculetin promoted apoptosis, and decreased cell proliferation and growth in an in vitro research employing HL‐60 cells by lowering Cyclin D1 and D3 expression, causing a cell cycle arrest in the G0/G1 phase, and inhibiting the Raf/MEK/ERK signaling cascade.

Lin et al investigated the impact of esculetin (50–100 μM) on U937 cells for 24, 48, and 72 h and discovered that esculetin promoted apoptosis and suppressed cell growth by lowering intracellular GSH levels, enhanced Bax, Bid cleavage, and release of cytochrome C, and triggered the MEK/ERK and JNK signaling pathways.

Esculetin decreases cell viability and proliferation and enhances apoptosis and DNA fragmentation by activating caspase‐3 and ‐9, with time‐dependent upregulation of phosphorylated‐Akt and superoxide anion and downregulation of Bcl‐2/Bax ratio and Glutathione (GSH) level.

Park et al concluded that esculetin inhibited the proliferation of human leukemia U937 cells via mitochondrial‐mediated apoptosis induction by increasing Cytochrome c release and phosphorylation of extracellular‐regulated kinase (ERK) and c‐Jun N‐terminal kinase (JNK) while simultaneously downregulating the anti‐apoptotic protein Bcl‐2.

According to several studies, it was found that esculetin is a natural stomach cancer therapeutic agent. Wanga et al showed both in vitro and in vivo that esculetin inhibits cell proliferation and increases apoptosis by way of the IGF‐1/PI3K/Akt signaling pathway, with upregulation of caspase‐3, and caspase‐9 expression as well as the Bax/Bcl‐2 ratio and cytC expression, and downregulation of IGF‐1, p‐PI3K, and p‐Akt expression.

Pan et al also found that esculetin, when applied to human gastric cancer cells in vitro (30–80 μM), increases caspase‐3, caspase‐8, caspase‐9, Bax and Bak, CypD, ROS, and decreases expression of Bcl‐2 and Bcl‐xL, resulting in apoptosis and a reduction in cell growth and viability.

In an in vitro investigation, PANC‐1, AsPC‐1, and MIA PaCA‐2 cells were shown to be sensitive to esculetin (100 μM), which triggered apoptosis and inhibited cell growth by activating caspases 9, 8, and 3, lowering p65‐ NF‐κB protein and ROS levels, and inducing a G1‐phase cell cycle arrest.

Researchers Zhang et al found that esculetin (50–100 mg/kg) triggered G1/S phase cell cycle arrest and reduced STAT3 phosphorylation, leading to decreased proliferation, migration, and invasion at in vitro experiments using a Hep‐2 cell line and an in vivo nude mouse xenograft animal model based on the JAK‐STAT signaling pathway.

Esculetin (6,7‐dihydroxy coumarin) is a coumarin molecule that suppresses cell proliferation, triggers apoptosis in various kinds of human cancer cells, and is a potential chemotherapeutic treatment. Cho et al investigated oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) cell lines HN22 and HSC4 at concentrations of 5–20 μg/mL over 24–48 h and found that esculetin decreased cell growth, cell survival and promoted apoptosis through inhibiting Sp1 and induced G1 phase cell cycle arrest.

Esculetin inhibited the proliferation of human submandibular salivary gland cancer cells by reducing Bcl‐2 expression and increasing Bax expression, as well as cleaved caspase‐3, caspase‐9, and Poly (ADP‐ribose) polymerase, according to an in vivo and in vitro study conducted by Park and colleagues using the A253 cell line.

Human malignant melanoma G361 cells were studied in vitro with esculetin, and the results showed that esculetin (0–80 μg/mL) causes apoptosis and nuclear shrinkage and fragmentation in G361 cells by raising levels of p21, p27, Bax, and active caspase 3, while lowering levels of cyclinD1, procaspase 3, and PARP.

Turkekul et al reported that esculetin (0–600 μM) was associated with cell cycle arrest in the G1 phase, elevated cytochrome C, p53, p21, and p27 expression, and decreased Cdk2, Cdk4, and Akt phosphorylation, which induced apoptosis and inhibited cell migration, cell survival, and cell proliferation.

Esculetin reduces renal cancer cell growth, migration, and invasion. Experiments using the 786‐O and SN12‐PM6 cell lines for RCC showed that esculetin‐induced apoptosis and cell cycle arrest at the G0/G1, and G2/M phases at concentrations of 0100200 μg/mL by increasing the expression of activated caspase‐3 and E‐Cadherin, and decreasing the expression of cyclin D1, CDK4, CDK6, c‐Myc, N‐cadherin, and vimentin.

A mice Xenograft model and in vitro studies on HEC‐1B cells showed that esculetin (0–120 μM) inhibited the development of endometrial cancer cells and induced apoptosis by upregulation of cleaved caspase‐3 and PARP and downregulation of BCLXL, XIAP, and pAKT expression.

Nanotechnology has revolutionized drug delivery systems, offering numerous advantages such as increased drug solubility, improved stability, targeted delivery, and enhanced bioavailability. When it comes to cancer treatment, these advantages are incredibly crucial. Formulating anticancer agents like esculetin into nano‐sized particles can significantly improve their efficacy. The research was carried out to examine the impact of nano‐esculetin on insulinoma INS‐1 cells, with an in vitro assessment of its effect on cell death and associated mechanisms.

A quick and environmentally friendly method was used to successfully create the nanocomposites of titanium dioxide nanoparticles adorned poly (diallyldimethylammonium chloride)‐functionalized grapheme (TiO2‐PDDA‐Gr) that optimize the efficiency of esculetin.

The purpose of the study performed by Song et al was to examine the protective effects of esculetin against neurotoxicity brought on by intragastric administration of zinc oxide nanoparticles (ZnO NPs) in Sprague–Dawley (SD) rats, which showed positive results.

The devastation caused by cancer is widespread, and natural remedies have previously been shown to be highly effective in treating cancer. Combined natural treatments have shown a significant benefit against cancer and decreased the adverse effects of several medications.

Recent studies of esculetin revealed the pharmacodynamic interactions between esculetin and six commonly used cytostatic drugs (cisplatin, epirubicin, docetaxel, paclitaxel, mitoxantrone, and vemurafenib) are very effective for cancer treatment. Epirubicin, and vemurafenib showed antagonistic interactions with esculetin, while cisplatin, docetaxel, and paclitaxel showed additive interactions with esculetin. Combination of these drugs with esculetin decreases cell viability, cell proliferation, and cytotoxicity, including arrest of the cell cycle in the G1 phase, induction of cytochrome c, p53, p21, and p27 expression, reduction of CDK2 and CDK4 expression and prevention the binding interaction between Nrf2 and KEAP‐1 in the range of concentrations of 2–200 μM in human malignant melanoma cell lines (FM55P, A375, FM55M2, and SK‐MEL28).

Regarding treating leukemia, the combined use of esculetin, and HA14‐1 effectively induced Bid cleavage and loss of mitochondrial membrane potential (MMP, Δψm), leading to the activation of caspases and cleavage of poly(ADP‐ribose) polymerase (PARP) in Bcl‐2‐overexpressing (U937/Bcl‐2) cells and upregulated the expression of death receptor 4 (DR4), and activation of extracellular‐regulated kinase (ERK) in a time‐dependent manner. Furthermore, the apoptosis property of esculetin is mediated by HA14‐1‐induced, which can reverse Bcl‐2 anti‐apoptotic action via a mitochondrial‐mediated pathway.

Again, in HCC, SMMC‐7721 cells, esculetin combined with sorafenib have a significant effect. By modulating the EGFR and VEGF‐RAS/ERK/PI3K/NF‐Baxes along with a significant upregulation of the apoptotic p38MAPK/caspase‐3 axis, modulation of pI3k/p38MAPK crosstalk, and inhibition of the proliferation marker Ki67, sorafenib, and esculetin combination exerted a potent synergistic anti‐tumor effect. This work sets the road for the potential future treatment of HCC involving esculetin as a potent adjuvant of sorafenib.

A literature study shows various drugs have been developed and employed to combat multidrug resistance. However, the bulk of these were ineffective for the intended use due to their numerous side effects. Esculetin alleviates drug resistance by downregulating cyclin D1 in breast cancer (CMT‐U27, CF41.mg),

Furthermore, esculetin has the potential to be used in conjunction with chemotherapy treatments against breast cancer since it induces cytotoxicity, promotes cell cycle arrest through increasing caspase‐3, and caspase‐9 while suppressing CDK1, and cyclin B1 expression with a dose of 60 μM.

Even though esculetin claims to have hundreds of therapeutic benefits, it may also address inevitable negative consequences or toxic reactions. Recently, esculetin, a physiologically active coumarin, was isolated from the bark of Fraxinus japonica BLUME.

Following 21 days of therapy, there was no discernible difference between the esculetin, and model control groups regarding feather color, body weight, food intake, irritation response, or mental state. It proves that esculetin has no overtly harmful short‐term effects on ducks.

Esculetin reduces blood triglyceride levels, prevents low‐density lipoprotein (LDL) from oxidizing, and raises the level of high‐density lipoprotein cholesterol that leaves the body (HDL‐C) while treating atherosclerosis without showing any toxicity, hence proving it is a safe and reliable, easy to be absorbed by the body.

Administration of esculetin does not cause any allergic reaction or skin inflammation rather, when given orally, esculetin lessened the signs of atopic skin irritation brought on by DFE/DNCB by suppressing the expression of Th1, Th2, and Th17 cytokines.

Overall, few side effects and trivial toxicity of esculetin were noticed, yet esculetin can be employed for preventive purposes since it may function as a new anticancer agent. One controversy is its high dose. Enhancing its bioavailability and reducing the total amount are crucial strategies to maximize its effectiveness in cancer treatment. Some possible approaches, including formulation optimization (nanoparticle formulations and micelles and liposomes), prodrug development, combination therapy, targeted therapy, enhancing absorption, bio‐enhancers, incorporating advanced drug delivery systems, and optimizing administration routes can significantly improve the bioavailability of esculetin and reduce the total dose required for effective cancer treatment, thereby minimizing potential side effects and improving patient outcomes.

Using Lipinski's “Rule of Five,” the “drug‐likeness” test was conducted, and all found compounds passed the test. More precisely, it was found that esculetin's molecular weight, QPlogPo/w, HBD, and HBA were 178.030 g/mol, 0.1, 2, and 4, respectively. This indicates that the compounds have good drug‐like qualities. Esculetin's physical and chemical characteristics, such as its molecular weight (MW), volume, density, nHA, nHD, nRot, nRing, MaxRing, flexibility, stereo centers, TPSA, logS, logP, and logD, were determined using the ADMETlab 2.0 server at Figure 3.

Evaluating drug absorption, distribution, metabolism, excretion, and toxicity (ADMET) prediction may help minimize the possible danger, time, and expense of assessing whether or not a molecule is suitable to advance to the clinical stage. The pharmacokinetics profile of all identified compounds predicted using in silico tools, such as Schrodinger's QuickPro modules and the online accessible server admetSAR, which provides absorption, distribution, metabolism, excretion, and toxicity at a reliable level, is tabulated in Table 5. This profile describes the drug‐like properties of each compound. For medications to enter the bloodstream, and be used in practical tasks, their ability to absorb is crucial. According to our projected outcome, esculetin may be highly absorbed orally and pass through skin, gut, and kidney cells. Drug movement inside the body is referred to as distribution, and it depends on several variables, including the permeability of the blood–brain barrier, the permeability of the central nervous system, the drug's capacity to attach to plasma proteins, and the overall volume of distribution. Drug concentration in the bloodstream significantly decrease when they bind to plasma proteins such as human serum albumin, lipoprotein, glycoprotein, and globulins. The notion that our proposed compounds come within the suggested range implies that they can reach the target region, and function correctly through the bloodstream. The mass of bodily fluid sufficient for blood plasma to dissolve is characterized as the volume of distribution. Admittedly, esculetin is more likely to spread evenly in tissue and blood plasma. Furthermore, the central nervous system and blood–brain barrier (QPlogBB) are critical for medications that address brain disease. Unfortunately, esculetin has a poor potential to cross the brain–blood barrier and central nervous system. The CYP450 enzyme metabolizes more than 80% of medications via liver first‐pass detoxification, and blocking this enzyme enhances drug toxicity and a multitude of side effects. Esculetin is a substrate for the majority of CYP450 subunits, including CYP1A2, CYP2C9, and CYP2D6, according to the expected metabolic outcome. Esculetin's in silico toxicity profile has been predicted based on the following parameters: hepatotoxicity, cardiotoxicity, skin sensitization, kidney toxicity, eye irritation, and AMES toxicity. Esculetin has demonstrated no toxicity against any of these except for eye irritation and skin sensitization. Using the total clearance (CLtot) and T 12, we estimated the clearance profile based on the renal clearance property of the compounds. Esculetin has the potential to be easily eliminated from the body once it has served its therapeutic purpose, according to the results, which confirmed the prediction.

Esculetin's pharmacokinetic profile indicates strong lead and efficiency with low toxicity risks. Esculetin can, therefore, be a helpful starting point for the development of drugs for the treatment of cancer and drug discovery. Examples include docking and pharmacophore‐based virtual screening.

Although, existing treatment strategies for cancer are failing (due to several factors), natural products are becoming influential in treating human cancer. Numerous investigations have been done to determine how esculetin works against various malignancies. In our current review, we found that esculetin inhibited the growth of many different types of cancer, including those of the breast, colon, liver, pancreatic, leukemia, lung, laryngeal, oral, salivary, melanoma, prostate, renal, endometrial, gastric, and ovaries at different doses and study models (Figure 4). Its role in cancer prevention has been proven at other pathways, such as by modulating signaling cascades involved in apoptosis, autophagy, necrosis, metastasis, angiogenesis, cell proliferation, cytotoxicity, cell growth, anti‐hepatotoxicity, nuclear shrinkage and fragmentation, oxidative stress, inflammation, and DNA damage. The capacity of esculetin to prevent cancer has been linked to the regulation of multiple proteins, including Bcl‐2, Bcl‐xL, Bax, Bak, Bid, caspases,

p21, p27, p53, and p27KIP, VEGF, GRP‐78, PERK, MMP‐2, MMP‐7, PARP, Nrf‐2, Ki‐67, pRB, N‐cadherin, E‐cadherin, survivin, sp1, JAK2/STAT3, cyto‐chrome‐C, NF‐κB, NF‐κBp65, NF‐κBp50, Wnt/β‐catenin, IL‐6, TNF‐α, phosphorylated‐Akt, PI3K/Akt, MAPK, Raf/MEK/ERK. When combined with other phytochemicals or conventional medications, esculetin may be more effective against cancer than alone. Synergistic mechanisms like this help reduce the side effects of cancer treatment medications that have been around for a while. The bioavailability of esculetin in cancer therapies may be increased by combining it with specific nanoparticles, which have been shown to be effective. In addition, this molecule has favorable pharmacokinetics while posing a lower risk of adverse effects, suggesting that it might be a suitable candidate for drug development when combined with other methods, such as network pharmacology and molecular docking, for the treatment of a variety of disorders, most notably for cancer. The authors suggest doing long‐term animal and clinical trial research to get a better understanding of the possible therapeutic advantages of treating cancer as well as the potential toxicities of the treatment. Despite the encouraging results from these studies, more research is needed to understand the anticancer potential of esculetin fully. Clinical trials are also required to confirm its efficacy in humans, and to determine the optimum dosage and treatment duration. If esculetin becomes an effective chemotherapeutics agent after passing all phases, some derivatives can be synthesized to assess their anticancer potential. Nevertheless, esculetin provides a promising lead in the quest for developing novel, and effective anticancer therapies.

Graphical presentation of drug likeness and pharmacokinetics studies of esculetin. MW (Molecular weight), Volume (Vander Waals Volume), Density, nHA (The number of hydrogen bond acceptors), nHD (The number of hydrogen bond donors), nRot (Number of ratable bond), nRing (Number of ring), MaxRing (Number of atom in the biggest ring), nHet (Number of hetero atoms), fChar (Formal charge), nRig (number of rigid bond), flexibility, stereo centers, TPSA (Topological polar surface area), logS (Water solubility), logP (Partition coefficient), logD (Distribution co‐efficient).

Md. Rezoan Hossain: Writing – original draft (equal). Fatema Tuj Zahra Shova: Writing – original draft (equal). Munni Akter: Writing – original draft (equal). Shahporan Shuvo: Writing – original draft (equal). Nasim Ahmed: Resources (equal). Afroza Akter: Writing – original draft (equal). Munira Haque: Writing – original draft (equal). Md Roman Mogal: Writing – original draft (equal). Hasi Rani Saha: Writing – original draft (equal). Bidhan Chandra Sarkar: Writing – original draft (equal). Umme Salma: Writing – original draft (equal). Md Sohel: Conceptualization (lead); supervision (lead); visualization (lead); writing – original draft (lead); writing – review and editing (lead).