Bone marrow transplantation in animals has been shown to generate epithelial populations, a phenomenon that has also recently been suggested to take place after human hematopoietic cell transplantation. However, reports in humans are not conclusive because they still leave open the possibility that the identified donor-derived cells are not epithelial cells but intraepithelial lymphocytes. Here, we demonstrate that donor-derived CD45+ hematopoietic cells in close contact with epithelial tissue may be falsely characterized as donor-derived epithelial cells if the three-dimensional structure of the tissue is not considered and the hematopoietic markers are not examined. By using a rigorous three-dimensional analysis on single sections of colon biopsies triple stained with donor-specific, epithelial-specific, and hematopoietic-specific markers we demonstrate that chimerism of colon epithelium is a real phenomenon occurring constantly after human hematopoietic cell transplantation. We exclude horizontal DNA transfer or cell fusion as the underlying mechanism of our findings. Tissue damage enhances the engraftment of the donor-derived epithelial cells. The physiological and therapeutical role of the donor-derived epithelial cells after human hematopoietic cell transplantation needs further investigation. However, their identification requires stringent and unequivocal detection systems.

Specificity and sensitivity of the FISH Y analysis. Triple staining of colon biopsies taken from HCT recipients by using FISH for the visualization of the Y-chromosome (red), fluorescence immunohistochemistry for CK (CK, green), and TOTO-3 nuclear counterstain (blue). Two-dimensional images of triple-stained colon biopsies from a female recipient after HCT from a female donor (a) and a male recipient after HCT from a male donor (b, c). In a and b 8-μm sections were stained, in c 4-μm sections were stained. The Y-chromosome was restricted to the male intestine, demonstrating hybridization specificity. Because of the partial sampling of the cells in thinner sections, the sensitivity of the FISH Y analysis was >98% in the 8-μm sections and ∼75% in the 4-μm sections.

Pitfalls by the detection of epithelial chimerism: overlapping cells? FISH Y-chromosome (red)/CK (green)/TOTO-3 (blue) triple-immunofluorescence staining of colon biopsies (8-μm sections) from female recipients transplanted with male BM cells. Two-dimensional images and three-dimensional volume projections at different angles are shown. a and b: The two-dimensional micrographs (left) of intestinal villi suggest the presence of CK+ cells containing the Y-chromosome (boxed areas). The collection of serial optical sections through the thickness of the specimen with the use of scanning laser confocal microscopy and their three-dimensional reconstruction demonstrates, however, a missing co-localization of the CK and the Y-chromosome signals in the z-dimension (right). In b the cells are shown in separate panels both with and without the TOTO-3 nuclear stain (blue). c and d: Three-dimensional co-localization of CK and Y-chromosome, strong CK immunostaining, and presence of the Y-chromosome signal within the TOTO-3-labeled nucleus. The absence of green CK staining at the top or the bottom of the three-dimensional projections shown in c and d is because of the partial sampling of the cells in the 8-μm tissue sections. e: Two-dimensional (top left) and three-dimensional views of a 20-μm tissue section. Compared to the thinner 8-μm sections, in this 20-μm-thick section entire cells are contained as can be seen in the Z-plane of the three-dimensional reconstruction. Because the CK skeleton completely surrounds the internal structures, the intracellular signals can be difficult to see with three-dimensional volume projections. Therefore, to more clearly demonstrate the signals within the cell, the three-dimensional reconstruction shown in e uses orthogonal slices in all three dimensions, centered on the Y-chromosome signal. The Y-chromosome is clearly confined to the blue nucleus, which itself is fully contained within the green CK structure. The three-dimensional images show the same cell as it appears from different angles of view. Donor-derived epithelial cells or intraepithelial lymphocytes enclosed by epithelial cells? Three-dimensional movie projections are published as supporting online material on The American Journal of Pathology web site (movies 2; a, c, d, e).

Pitfalls by the detection of epithelial chimerism: donor-derived epithelial cell or intraepithelial lymphocyte? a: Triple staining of colon biopsies taken from HCT female recipients by using FISH for the Y-chromosome (red) and fluorescence immunohistochemistry for CK (blue) and for CD45 (green). A donor-derived intraepithelial lymphocyte detected with this method may falsely be detected as Y+/CK+ cell if CD45 expression is not examined (right, green channel turned off). b: Staining of CD45 in serial 4-μm sections cannot exclude the presence of lymphocytes in the section studied by FISH analysis. The middle 4-μm section (middle row) was stained with the Y (red)/CK (blue)/CD45 (green) triple stain, while the adjacent sections (4 μm) above (top row) and below (bottom row) are immunocytochemically stained with CD45 antibodies (red). The intraepithelial CD45+ cell (yellow arrow) visible in the Y/CK/CD45-stained middle section is not detected in the serial sections above or below. Other CD45+ cells located in the lamina propria that were detected in the middle and an adjacent section are not apparent in the remaining section (red arrow). A Y+/CK+/CD45− donor-derived epithelial cell is also seen (white arrow). Left and right, low- and high-power magnification, respectively.

Epithelial chimerism after human HCT. a–d: FISH Y-chromosome (red)/CK (blue)/CD45 (green) triple-immunofluorescence staining of female colon biopsies (8-μm sections). Two-dimensional and three-dimensional images of Y+/CK+/CD45− cells from different patients. Donor-derived lymphocytes were stained Y+/CD45+, as expected. Three-dimensional movie projections are published as supporting online material on The American Journal of Pathology web site (movies 4, a and c). e: FISH Y-chromosome (blue)/FISH X-chromosome (red)/CK (green) triple-immunofluorescence staining. Images show maximal projections of a CK+/Y+ cell found in a female colon biopsy in all dimensions. A CK+ cell visible in the XY plane contains a Y-chromosome (blue) and only one X-chromosome (red). These chromosomes were also the only ones detected within the cell in the other dimensions as shown.