The continuous recirculation of lymphocytes requires an adequate expression and function of the molecules mediating the cellular interactions between endothelium and lymphocytes. Human vascular adhesion protein 1 (hVAP-1) is an endothelial cell adhesion molecule that mediates the binding of lymphocytes to venules in peripheral lymph nodes as well as at sites of inflammation. Recently the mouse homologue of hVAP-1 has been cloned. It is a previously unknown molecule with a significant sequence identity to copper-containing amine oxidases. Besides the sequence, very little is known about the expression, structure, and function of mouse VAP-1 (mVAP-1). In this study we demonstrate that mVAP-1 is prominently expressed in endothelial and smooth muscle (but not in other types of muscle cells), as well as in adipocytes. mVAP-1 is a 220-kd homodimeric sialoglycoprotein that displays cell-type-specific differences in glycosylation. The expression of mVAP-1 is induced on inflammation in the vessels of the endocrine pancreas during the development of insulitis, and the up-regulation correlates with the extent of the lymphocytic infiltrate. In general, different mouse strains displayed very similar VAP-1 expression, but the small differences seen in liver and gut suggest that immunostimulation may modulate VAP-1 synthesis in extrapancreatic organs as well. Finally, we show that mVAP-1 has a monoamine oxidase activity against naturally occurring substrates, implying a role in the development of vasculopathies. These data show that mVAP-1 and hVAP-1 are very similar molecules that nevertheless have certain marked differences in expression, biochemical structure, and substrate specificity. Thus mVAP-1 is a novel inflammation-inducible mouse molecule that has a dual adhesive and enzymatic function.

mAb TK10-79 recognizes recombinant mVAP-1. mVAP-1 cDNA or mock transfected CHO cells were stained with mAbs Hermes-1 (negative control) or with TK 10-79 (against mVAP-1) and analyzed by FACS. The x axis is the fluorescence intensity on a log-scale, and the y axis is the relative number of cells. A positive staining with mAb TK10-79 is obtained only after fixation of the transfectants with methanol.

Tissue distribution of mVAP-1. Staining of formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded mouse tissues with a negative control mAb Hermes-1 are shown in the last (narrower) micrograph of each series, and anti-mVAP-1 MAb TK10-79 stainings are shown in the first or first two micrographs of each series. A: Gut. Bw, bowel wall; Mm, muscularis mucosae. Arrows indicate lamina proporia vessels. B: Peyer’s patch. Arrowheads point to two mVAP-1-positive HEVs. C: Spleen. wp, white pulp. Arrows indicate two mVAP-1-positive splenic vessels. D: Bone. Sinusoidal vessels of bone marrow in femur are pointed out by arrows. Tr, bone trabeculae. E: Thymus. Arrows point to mVAP-1-positive vessels at the corticomedullary junction. F: Lung. Bronchus epithelium (curved arrow) lacks mVAP-1, whereas the smooth muscle layer of terminal bronchii (arrowheads) and endothelium of large veins (arrows) are mVAP-1 positive. G: Heart. Capillary endothelium (arrows) and larger vessels are mVAP-1 positive. H: Kidney. mVAP-1 is absent from glomeruli (gl), tubuli (one outlined with a dashed line), and intertubular vessels (arrows) but present on afferent arterioles (arrowheads). I: Liver. Sinusoidal endothelial cells are very faintly mVAP-1 positive (arrowheads), whereas central veins (arrow) are strongly mVAP-1 positive. J: White fat. The original magnifications were ×100 (A1, C2, E2, H1), ×200 (B1 and 2, C1, F1 and 3, G1), and ×400 in the others.

The expression of mVAP-1 and MAdCAM-1 in pancreas. A, B: MAdCAM-1 is expressed both on vessels within the inflamed islets (IS) and on periislet vessels of pancreas from a 12-week NOD mouse. C, D: mVAP-1 staining of the same islets as in A and B in serial sections. Note that the vessels marked by arrows coexpress MAdCAM-1 and VAP-1. Original magnifications: (A, C) ×200; (B, D) ×400.

Lymphocyte infiltration correlates with the expression of mVAP-1 in islet vessels. A: In islet (IS) with no/very low lymphocyte infiltration the expression of mVAP-1 is undetectable, whereas islets (B) with a high number of lymphocytes have strongly mVAP-1-positive vessels (arrow). Original magnification, ×400.

TK10-79 recognizes a 110/220 kd molecule in different mouse tissues. Lysates from different mouse organs were separated by SDS-PAGE and thereafter subjected to immunoblotting with the indicated mAbs. A: Under nonreducing conditions a 220-kd band (arrow) can be detected, whereas the monomeric 110-kd band is detectable only from adipose tissue and smooth muscle lysate (in overexposures the 110-kd band can be seen also from lanes 1 and 3–13). hVAP-1 in smooth muscle lysate (arrowhead) is smaller than the corresponding mouse antigen (lane 9). B: Under reducing conditions, the monomeric ∼110-kd form of mVAP-1 (arrowhead) and a high-molecular-weight smear from mouse smooth muscle lysate are detected. Molecular weight standards are listed on the left.

mVAP-1 is a glycoprotein. Lysates from the indicated mouse tissues were subjected to different glycosidase digestions before SDS-PAGE and immunoblotting with mAb TK10-79 under reducing conditions. All of the negative control stainings with Hermes-1 were negative. −, nontreated; sial, V. cholerae sialidase; O-Glyc, endo-α-N-acetylgalactosaminidase; N-Glyc, peptide:N-glycanase F is the name of the enzyme. The molecular weight standards are listed on the left.

Substrate specificity of mVAP-1. Formation of labeled aldehyde product from radioactive benzylamine (Bz) in a mVAP-1-catalyzed reaction in the absence (−) or in the presence of competing amines was measured using scintillography. Quantification of the results (mean activity in cpm ± SEM) was obtained from two independent enzyme assays, each performed in duplicate with two different mVAP-1 CHO lines. PEA, phenylethylamine.