The immunosuppressive drug mycophenolate mofetil (MMF) is used after nonmyeloablative hematopoietic cell transplantation (HCT); however, limited pharmacodynamic data are available. We evaluated plasma concentrations of mycophenolic acid (MPA), the active metabolite of MMF, and outcomes in 85 patients with hematologic malignancies conditioned with fludarabine and 2 Gy total body irradiation followed by HLA-matched unrelated-donor HCT and postgrafting cyclosporine and MMF. The first 38 patients received MMF 15 mg/kg twice daily; the next 47 patients received MMF 3 times daily. MPA pharmacokinetics were determined on days 7 and 21. Comparing the twice-daily and 3-times-daily MMF groups, the mean total MPA concentration steady state (Css) was 1.9 and 3.1 μg/mL; the unbound Css was 18 and 36 ng/mL, respectively (P < .001). Sixteen patients with a total MPA Css less than 3 μg/mL had low (< 50%) donor T-cell chimerism (P = .03), and 6 patients with MPA Css less than 2.5 μg/mL had graft rejection. An elevated unbound Css was associated with cytomegalovirus reactivation (P = .03). There were no significant associations between MPA pharmacokinetics and acute graft-versus-host disease (GVHD) or relapse. We conclude that increased MPA Css's predicted higher degrees of donor T-cell chimerism after unrelated donor nonmyeloablative HCT and suggest that targeting MPA Css's greater than 2.5 μg/mL could prevent graft rejection.

L.G. and G.E.G. designed the research, performed the clinical aspects of the research, analyzed the data, and wrote or substantially edited the manuscript; J.S.M. designed the research, performed the pharmacologic analyses in the research, analyzed the data, and wrote or substantially edited the manuscript; M.B.M., B.M.S., R.A.N., and R.F.S. designed the research and performed the clinical aspects of the research; T.A.G. analyzed the data and wrote or substantially edited the manuscript; and J.T.S. and S.C. performed the pharmacologic analyses in the research and developed new analytic tools.