Jean-Patrick Baudry is Doctorant and Gilles Celeux is Directeur de Recherche, both at INRIA Saclay Île-de-France, Université Paris-Sud, Bâtiment 425, 91405 Orsay Cedex, France. Jean-Patrick Baudry is also with Laboratoire MAP5, Université Paris Descartes and CNRS. Adrian E. Raftery is Blumstein-Jordan Professor of Statistics and Sociology, Box 354322, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195-4322. Kenneth Lo is Postdoctoral Senior Fellow, Department of Microbiology, Box 358070, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195-8070. Raphaël Gottardo is Research Unit Director in Computational Biology, Institut de recherches cliniques de Montréal (IRCM), 110, avenue des Pins Ouest, Montréal, Canada H2W 1R7.

Model-based clustering consists of fitting a mixture model to data and identifying each cluster with one of its components. Multivariate normal distributions are typically used. The number of clusters is usually determined from the data, often using BIC. In practice, however, individual clusters can be poorly fitted by Gaussian distributions, and in that case model-based clustering tends to represent one non-Gaussian cluster by a mixture of two or more Gaussian distributions. If the number of mixture components is interpreted as the number of clusters, this can lead to overestimation of the number of clusters. This is because BIC selects the number of mixture components needed to provide a good approximation to the density, rather than the number of clusters as such. We propose first selecting the total number of Gaussian mixture components, K, using BIC and then combining them hierarchically according to an entropy criterion. This yields a unique soft clustering for each number of clusters less than or equal to K. These clusterings can be compared on substantive grounds, and we also describe an automatic way of selecting the number of clusters via a piecewise linear regression fit to the rescaled entropy plot. We illustrate the method with simulated data and a flow cytometry dataset. Supplemental Materials are available on the journal Web site and described at the end of the paper.