Corresponding author: Peisong Gao, MD, PhD, Division of Allergy & Clinical Immunology, 5501 Hopkins Bayview Circle, Baltimore, MD 21224. pgao1@jhmi.edu. Or: Zheng Liu, MD, PhD, Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, No.1095 Jiefang Avenue, Wuhan 430030, China. zhengliuent@hotmail.com

Disclosure of potential conflict of interest: H. Wang’s institution received a grant from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (grant no. 81200733) for this work. M. E. Anderson’s and P. Gao’s institution received grants from the National Institutes of Health/the National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences for this work. Z. Liu’s institutions received grants from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (grant nos. 81325006, 81570899, and 81630024) for this work. The rest of the authors declare that they have no relevant conflicts of interest.

Chronic rhinosinusitis with nasal polyps (CRSwNP) is associated with mast cell–mediated inflammation and heightened oxidant stress. Kynurenine (KYN), an endogenous tryptophan metabolite, can promote allergen-induced mast cell activation through the aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR).

We measured the expression of indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase 1, tryptophan 2,3-dioxygenase, KYN, and oxidized calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II (ox-CaMKII) in nasal polyps and controls. KYN-potentiated ovalbumin (OVA)-induced ROS generation, cell activation, and ox-CaMKII expression were investigated in wild-type and AhR-deficient (AhR−/−) mast cells. The role of ox-CaMKII in mast cell activation was further investigated.

Nasal polyps in CRSwNP showed an increased expression of indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase 1, tryptophan2,3-dioxygenase, and KYN compared with controls. AhR was predominantly expressed in mast cells in nasal polyps. Activated mast cells and local IgE levels were substantially increased in eosinophilic polyps compared with noneosinophilic polyps and controls. Furthermore, KYN potentiated OVA-induced ROS generation, intracellular Ca2+ levels, cell activation, and expression of ox-CaMKII in wild-type, but not in AhR−/− mast cells. Compared with noneosinophilic polyps and controls, eosinophilic polyps showed increased expression of ox-CaMKII in mast cells. Mast cells from ROS-resistant CaMKII MMVVδ mice or pretreated with CaMKII inhibitor showed protection against KYN-promoted OVA-induced mast cell activation.