Since January 2020 Elsevier has created a COVID-19 resource centre with free information in English and Mandarin on the novel coronavirus COVID-19. The COVID-19 resource centre is hosted on Elsevier Connect, the company's public news and information website. Elsevier hereby grants permission to make all its COVID-19-related research that is available on the COVID-19 resource centre - including this research content - immediately available in PubMed Central and other publicly funded repositories, such as the WHO COVID database with rights for unrestricted research re-use and analyses in any form or by any means with acknowledgement of the original source. These permissions are granted for free by Elsevier for as long as the COVID-19 resource centre remains active.

Leukocyte responses in the patient are evaluated by the leukogram. The leukogram is the leukocyte portion of the complete blood count (CBC) and includes the total leukocyte (white blood cell [WBC]) count, differential leukocyte count (Diff), and description of WBC morphology. The relative leukocyte differential count (relative Diff) is the percentages of various leukocyte types (i.e., segmented neutrophils [segs], nonsegmented neutrophils [nonsegs], lymphocytes, monocytes, eosinophils, basophils). The absolute differential leukocyte count (absolute Diff) is the number of each type of leukocyte per volume (microliter or liter) of blood. Examination of leukocyte morphology on the stained blood smear is used to determine a relative Diff and detect various abnormalities. Selected hematologic techniques are described in Chapter 2. This chapter is intended to give an overview of understanding the leukocyte response and to answer common questions in diagnosis. Supplemental information regarding leukogram interpretation may be found in other textbooks.18, 20, 25, 35, 46

Leukocytes are inflammatory cells, and changes in the leukogram are mainly used to identify the presence of inflammatory disease and characterize inflammation as to severity and type. The leukogram is not highly sensitive in detecting mild, focal, or chronic inflammation; therefore, a normal WBC count and Diff does not exclude inflammatory disease from the diagnosis. Acute phase protein concentrations, such as C-reactive protein in dogs and serum amyloid A in cats, are much more sensitive tests to document the presence of inflammation. The manual Diff is imprecise; therefore, the clinician should use prominent changes in the number of types of WBCs for diagnosis.

The leukogram usually does not confirm infection, but some patterns, such as a very severe left shift together with very toxic neutrophils, strongly suggest severe infection. Infection is more consistently confirmed by finding the organism and associated inflammatory reaction with cytology (Chapter 16) and culture of tissues that look abnormal on ultrasound, radiographs, or physical exam. Similarly, the leukogram often does not confirm hematologic neoplasia such as malignant lymphoma, while cytology, histopathology, and histochemical and immunologic evaluation of hematopoietic tissues that appear abnormal on ultrasound, radiographs, or physical exam more consistently give a correct diagnosis (see later discussion of hematopoietic neoplasia under Leukemia).

The automated total leukocyte count (WBC) from most veterinary hematology instruments is accurate and precise. The automated differential leukocyte count (AutoDiff) of human hematology instruments has to a great extent replaced the manual Diff (ManDiff) in human medicine because this eliminates the cost of hiring a well-trained person to evaluate the smears and because of the greater precision with the AutoDiff. The AutoDiff has several uses in the dog and cat, but these uses vary with the instrument and the patient's problem. Current veterinary instruments fail to identify all types of canine and feline leukocytes. No automated instrument enumerates the number of bands and younger neutrophils, and most instruments fail to identify nonsegs or basophils. Many instruments detect the total neutrophil and lymphocyte counts, and often eosinophil counts, well. A proper indication for use of an AutoDiff is to monitor treatment response of these types of leukocytes over days. This takes advantage of the instrument's greater precision and cost savings in labor time.

Some instruments have sporadic errors in detection of eosinophils and monocytes. Some instruments offer only a three-cell Diff, which actually only indicates the number of total neutrophils and lymphocytes. Since a major use of the CBC and Diff is to document the presence and severity of inflammatory disease, it is necessary to use a manual Diff to document a left shift and toxic change in neutrophils. A ManDiff is often required to validate a monocytosis, eosinophilia, or basophilia recorded by an AutoDiff. The combination of precise data from hematology instruments and subjective observations from the blood smear give the greatest chance to make a proper diagnosis and prognosis during initial evaluation of an ill patient. Then, based on the instrument being used and its ability to correctly measure the hematologic abnormality documented by a full CBC, including WBC, AutoDiff, and manual Diff, the clinician may subsequently monitor that change over time and treatment using only automated results.NoteThe combination of precise data from hematology instruments and subjective but correct observations from the blood smear give the greatest chance to make a proper diagnosis and prognosis during initial evaluation of an ill patient.

). For example, a WBC count of 10,000 leukocytes/µl with 65% segs has 6500 segs/µl. The 6500 segs/µl is normal, but 65% segs are not always normal. A WBC count of 1000 leukocytes/µl with 65% segs indicates severe neutropenia (i.e., 650 segs/µl). A WBC count of 50,000 leukocytes/µl with 65% segs indicates neutrophilia (i.e., 32,500 segs/µl).FIGURE 4-1Relative and absolute leukocyte counts. The bottom chamber of each bar indicates the absolute number of band neutrophils, and the percentage below the bars indicates the relative percentage of band neutrophils. The relative change between the first and second bar (i.e., 20% to 2%) seems great; however, no change exists in the absolute number of band neutrophils in the blood (i.e., 200 bands/µl of blood). The relative percentage of band neutrophils between the second and third bars seems identical. However, a normal number of band neutrophils exists in the dog with 200 bands/µl of blood, but a true increase (left shift) in band neutrophils occurs in the dog with 1200 bands/µl in the third bar. WBC, White blood cell.

Interpretation of the leukogram should begin with interpretation of the absolute cell count for each type of leukocyte. Then the changes are summarized by appropriate hematologic terms indicating an increase or decrease in a given leukocyte type. For example, “mild to moderate leukocytosis with mature neutrophilia, lymphopenia, and monocytosis” indicates that there was an increased total WBC count, an increase in mature segmented neutrophils but no increase in band neutrophils, a decrease in lymphocytes, and an increased numbers of monocytes, respectively. This particular description is typical for a recent glucocorticoid treatment or stress-type response.NoteAbsolute cell numbers rather than percentages should be used to evaluate the leukogram.

To interpret the concentration of leukocytes in the blood, one must consider the rate of leukocyte production in bone marrow and release into blood, the distribution and circulating half-life of leukocytes in the vascular system, and the rate of emigration of leukocytes from blood into tissues. Understanding of normal hematopoiesis is also needed to understand classification of the leukemias (neoplasia of hematopoietic cells, discussed later).

Granulocytes (i.e., neutrophils, eosinophils, basophils) and monocytes are produced in the bone marrow. Although the bone marrow produces some lymphocytes, most lymphocytes are produced by the peripheral lymphoid tissues (i.e., thymus, lymph nodes, spleen, tonsils, bronchial-associated lymphoid tissue, gut-associated lymphoid tissue). Leukocytes develop in the bone marrow from pluripotent and committed stem cells influenced by interleukins and colony-stimulating factors (Figure 4-2

FIGURE 4-2Differentiation of the bone marrow pluripotent stem cells. Baso, Basophil; BFU, burst-forming unit; CFU, colony-forming unit; DC, dendritic cell; E, erythroid; Eo, eosinophil; GEMM, granulocyte-erythroid-monocyte-megakaryocyte; GM, granulocyte-macrophage; Mega, megakaryocyte; NK, natural killer.

Neutrophils compose the majority of leukocytes in blood, and usually leukocytosis is caused by neutrophilia. Kinetics of neutrophils has been well studied and is best understood. Thus the initial discussion here focuses on neutrophils. Cellular “pools” are used to conceptualize and describe the “location” of neutrophils within the bone marrow and blood and to simplify interpretation of bone marrow and CBC data (Figure 4-3

). Bone marrow is divided into two pools. The first, the mitotic pool of myeloblasts, promyelocytes, and myelocytes, provides a steady supply of neutrophils to meet tissue demand for these cells. The second pool is maturation and storage, which consists of metamyelocytes, bands, and segs that lack mitotic ability. Precursor cells undergo progressive maturation and provide a reserve pool of segs to meet sudden increased tissue demands for neutrophils until the mitotic pool increases neutrophil production. It is uncommon in the dog and cat to have leukopenia during inflammatory diseases because this large storage pool is available for rapid release of neutrophils. The maturation and storage pools are combined in Figure 4-3. The most mature stages of neutrophil are preferentially released from the bone marrow into the blood first (segs, bands, metamyelocytes, myelocytes, and finally promyelocytes, in that order). As bone marrow stores of segs are depleted, nonsegs (e.g., bands, metamyelocytes, younger neutrophils) are released into the blood, and a left shift occurs: A left shift is a specific indicator of inflammation, and the severity of the left shift reflects the severity of inflammation.FIGURE 4-3Neutrophil compartments in the body. Neutrophils in various areas of the body are grouped into pools for evaluation. The bone marrow cells are divided into the mitotic, maturation, and storage pools (see text). Neutrophils in blood are either in the circulating pool, which is sampled by a complete blood count (CBC), or the marginal pool, which is hidden from sampling via the CBC. Neutrophils move in one direction into the tissues, where they can be evaluated by cytology or histopathology.(Modified from Boggs DR, Winkelstein A: White cell manual, ed 3, Philadelphia, 1975, FA Davis.)

The maturation and storage pool constitutes 80% of the myeloid cell population, whereas the mitotic pool usually accounts for 20% of the myeloid series. In contrast with neutrophils, promonocytes and monocytes are released into blood at a relatively young age. This lack of monocyte maturation and storage in the bone marrow explains why monocytes are observed infrequently in most bone marrow aspirates, unless severe neutropenia is present.

Leukocyte numbers and morphology within the bone marrow can be evaluated by bone marrow aspiration for cytology and core biopsy for histopathology. Aspirate smears of marrow allow qualitative and quantitative observations regarding cell morphology and maturation. Core biopsy provides the best estimation of bone marrow cellularity and detects stromal reactions (e.g., myelofibrosis, granulomatous osteomyelitis). Chapter 2 discusses the interpretation of a bone marrow examination.NoteThe production of segs from bone marrow myeloblasts takes approximately 6 days in the dog and cat, but rapid release of neutrophils from the normally large storage pool can produce a neutrophilia within minutes to hours. Leukopenia is therefore uncommon in dogs and cats during even early stages of inflammatory disease. This is unlike the delay in release of reticulocytes, which peak in numbers in peripheral blood 4 to 6 days after onset of a regenerative anemia.

When neutrophils are released into the blood, about half hesitatively stick and roll along the endothelial cells (i.e., in the marginal pool) and are not in the central axial flow of blood within vessels from which blood is taken during a venipuncture (i.e., in the circulating pool). Those neutrophils that are in the central axial flow of blood within vessels and are taken into a blood sample (and counted in the WBC count) are said to be in the circulating pool. The marginal neutrophil pool is a “hidden” population associated with the endothelial lining of capillaries, especially the lungs and spleen. The circulating and marginal cell pools make up the total blood neutrophil pool (TBNP). Neutrophils distribute between circulating and marginal cell pools, circulate for a brief period of time (half-life of 7.4 hours), and emigrate from blood vessels into tissues. Shifts between these pools can affect the WBC count, especially in cats. In dogs, circulating and marginal pools are about equal. In cats, the marginal pool is two to three times the size of the circulating pool (Table 4-1

). Therefore, if neutrophils are mobilized from the marginal pool to the circulating pool in response to fear, excitement, or strenuous exercise, the neutrophil count can potentially double in dogs and triple in cats. This effect is called physiologic leukocytosis and is seen mainly in young healthy cats.TABLE 4-1TOTAL BLOOD NEUTROPHIL POOL, CIRCULATING NEUTROPHIL POOL, AND MARGINAL NEUTROPHIL POOL IN DOGS AND CATSDOGCATTBNP × 108/kg10.228.9CNP × 108/kg5.47.8MNP × 108/kg4.821.0Total blood neutrophil pool (TBNP) in cats is larger than in dogs because of a very large marginal neutrophil pool. The relatively large feline marginal neutrophil pool (MNP), compared with that of the dog, allows a larger potential shift of neutrophils into the circulating neutrophil pool (CNP) with more dramatic leukocytosis during fear, excitement, or strenuous exercise.

Neutrophils normally spend about 10 hours in the vascular system before emigrating from the blood vessels into the tissues. Emigration is a random (i.e., non–age ordered) and unidirectional (these cells do not return to the circulation) event. In health, neutrophils primarily migrate into the respiratory, digestive, and urinary tracts at a low rate in response to bacteria and other stimuli. Neutrophils lyse quickly in the septic environment of the lumen of the bowel. In inflammation, excessive tissue neutrophils may be visible as exudate or pus (see Chapter 16). In diseases such as enteritis, tissue neutrophils may be hidden from cytologic or gross observation; however, increased tissue demand for neutrophils usually is reflected in the leukogram.NoteThe CBC allows quantitative and morphologic observations about leukocytes in peripheral blood. The leukogram represents the balance of leukocyte production in bone marrow, distribution in the vascular system, and emigration from blood vessels into tissues. Cytologic examination of abnormal tissues, organs, or fluids can document where and what type of inflammation or infection exists.

The three most common causes of neutrophilia and leukocytosis are (1) inflammation, (2) stress and corticosteroids, and (3) exercise and epinephrine. Leukemia is relatively uncommon (discussed later) but may cause massive to no increase in the WBC count. Inflammation is most specifically identified by the presence of a left shift, or an absolute increase in nonsegs (Figure 4-4

; see later discussion of left shift and hyposegmentation). Inflammation is also suggested by leukocytosis greater than that usually expected with corticosteroid- or epinephrine-associated changes. When mild neutrophilia is present without a left shift, the specific cause of leukocytosis may be unclear. In such instances, the absolute lymphocyte count may be useful. Lymphopenia is commonly associated with an endogenous stress-associated or exogenous glucocorticoid treatment effect. Transient lymphocytosis may be caused by epinephrine-induced splenic contraction or an exercise-associated effect. Persistent lymphocytosis is often caused by chronic immune stimulus. Concurrent processes occur often. For example, inflammation usually causes stress-related lymphopenia. Corticosteroid treatment is very common.NoteLeukocytosis and neutrophilia are not only caused by inflammation. Leukocytosis may be a response to glucocorticoid treatment or may result from acute stress, an epinephrine-type response to fear or exercise, and occasionally leukemia.

FIGURE 4-4Evaluation of leukocytosis and neutrophilia. The common causes of neutrophilia and subsequent leukocytosis usually may be differentiated based on the immaturity of the neutrophils, the magnitude of the neutrophilia, and the tendency of the lymphocytes to increase or decrease. When the laboratory finding is present (Yes), the conclusion to the right is made. When the laboratory finding is absent (No), one moves down to the next differentiating feature. The values given are guidelines for more certain diagnosis, and lesser values may still be interpreted to give certain conclusions. For example, dogs with inflammation often have fewer than 40,000 white blood cells (WBCs)/µl and fewer than 1000 nonsegs/µl. Cases with mild neutrophilia may lack criteria to make a definite diagnosis. Granulocytic leukemia is rare and not considered here.

Inflammation is a common and important laboratory diagnosis. Inflammation usually causes neutrophilia and is the major rule out for neutrophilic leukocytosis. Neutrophils predominate in tissues during acute phases of many inflammatory diseases (e.g., peritonitis, arthritis). Proliferation of macrophages and lymphocytes occurs in more subacute to chronic inflammation (especially within tissues other than blood). But many chronic inflammatory diseases (suppurative or exudative diseases) may still have primarily neutrophils. Other inflammatory cells, such as monocytes-macrophages, eosinophils, lymphocytes, plasma cells, and even basophils, increase in blood and other tissues in various types of inflammatory disease (see later discussions). Neutrophils are specialists at killing bacteria, and bacterial infection (i.e., sepsis) commonly causes neutrophilic types of inflammation (e.g., exudative, purulent, suppurative, abscess) as well as pyogranulomatous inflammation. However, neutrophilia occurs with other infections such as certain mycotic, protozoal, and viral infections (e.g., feline infectious peritonitis). Inflammation also may occur from nonseptic processes such as necrosis (e.g., pancreatitis, pansteatitis, immune-mediated hemolytic anemia, [IMHA]), chemical exposure (e.g., turpentine is an experimental method of abscess formation), immune-mediated diseases (e.g., systemic lupus erythematosus, IMHA), and toxins (e.g., endotoxin, snake bite). Neoplasms may cause inflammation in several ways, such as causing ulceration, causing necrosis in normal tissues, outgrowing or damaging the blood supply with subsequent necrosis in the tumor, predisposing the patient to infection, or producing a paraneoplastic effect wherein tumor products stimulate the bone marrow to produce neutrophils or eosinophils.NoteNeutrophilia with a left shift greater than 1000 nonsegs/µl (1.0 nonsegs × 109/L) specifically indicates inflammatory disease.

A left shift (increased absolute numbers of immature neutrophils) indicates inflammatory disease in the patient (see Figure 4-4). Identification of immature neutrophils requires blood smear evaluation. Immature neutrophils such bands, metamyelocytes, myelocytes, and younger neutrophils are termed nonsegmented neutrophils (nonsegs) in general. Identification of nonsegs is subjective and varies greatly among microscopists. Most experienced microscopists, who examine blood smears daily, clearly recognize increased immaturity and toxic changes in neutrophils during inflammation. However, the number of bands, metamyelocytes, and myelocytes reported will vary among observers. Exact numbers of these cells are often impossible to determine when severe toxic change is present, in which case a subjective description should be used; for example, “The blood had a severe degenerative left shift with severe toxic change in neutrophils, though exact numbers of each cell type could not be determined.” may be the most honest description. Even in nontoxic reactions the division between segs and nonsegs may be difficult, and the term hyposegmentation is then used to indicate that the neutrophils looked more immature than normal though the number of reported nonsegs was not increased.

Because of the effect of the observer's impression in classification of nonsegs, one should use a definite increase in nonsegs for a certain conclusion of inflammation. A finding of greater than 1000 nonsegs/µl is a reasonable threshold for a left shift. (Note that 1000 nonsegs/µl equals 1.0 nonsegs × 109/L.) Small changes from day to day or slight changes from the reference values should be interpreted with caution because manual differential leukocyte counts are especially imprecise with nonsegs and cells found in low numbers, such as basophils. Mild left shifts (i.e., 300 to 1000 nonsegs/µl) occur in hemorrhagic, chronic, or granulomatous diseases. No left shift may be noted in many patients with inflammatory disease, thus the absence of a left shift or a very mild left shift does not exclude inflammation from the diagnosis.

The absolute number of nonsegs and their state of immaturity indicate the severity of the left shift. Immature neutrophils (nonsegs) observed in blood include bands (stabs), metamyelocytes (juveniles), myelocytes, and promyelocytes. Bands usually constitute most of the left shift because the more mature neutrophils are released from bone marrow first. Neutrophils younger than bands indicate an increasingly severe left shift associated with increasingly intense inflammation. If several myelocytes and metamyelocytes are found, the number of metamyelocytes, myelocytes, and promyelocytes should be reported individually (not simply grouped as nonsegs) to indicate severity of the left shift. Detectable numbers of blast cells (i.e., myeloblasts) or irregular maturation patterns may suggest granulocytic leukemia. More nonsegs than segs indicates a degenerative left shift and a poor prognosis.NoteThe severity of a left shift is reflected by the absolute number of nonsegs and individual numbers of the more immature stages (e.g., metamyelocytes and myelocytes) present. Increasing severity of the left shift indicates increasing severity of the inflammatory disease.

shows a likely pattern of leukocyte changes through a typical inflammatory response, with a distinct onset of inflammation and then progressing uniformly to resolution. Changes in individual patients may vary from this typical pattern due to treatment, rupture of an abscess, or the like. The greatest left shift is expected in early stages of the disease process, because as the preexisting bone marrow storage pool is depleted of segs, then more bands and metamyelocytes are released to meet early intense demand. With time, myeloid hyperplasia within the bone marrow expands neutrophil production. When neutrophil production and maturation time are sufficient, mainly mature segs are released into the blood and the severity of the left shift should diminish or disappear. If tissue inflammation stabilizes at a persistent low to moderate level, the bone marrow should reach a production rate sufficient for most neutrophils to mature before release. Thus chronic inflammation may be characterized by little to no left shift and minimal to no leukocytosis. Therefore, chronic or mild inflammation may be difficult to document by leukogram data alone. Acute phase proteins, such as C-reactive protein or serum amyloid A, are sensitive indicators of inflammation and may be used to complement the leukogram. Increased rouleaux (see Chapter 2) in canine blood smears or fever in the patient suggests inflammation. Increased rouleaux formation usually is associated with production of acute phase proteins such as fibrinogen. A normal leukogram appearance does not exclude inflammatory diseases, especially if inflammation is mild or chronic, or only involves a surface (e.g., cystitis).NoteChronic inflammation may have mild (slight, mature neutrophilia) or no changes in the leukogram because, with time, increased bone marrow production of neutrophils matches tissue consumption.

FIGURE 4-5Expected leukocyte changes with resolving inflammation. The greatest leukocytosis and left shift are expected early in acute inflammation. This period is also accompanied by the lymphopenia of stress. During later phases of inflammation, a more mature form of neutrophilia is expected, because bone marrow hyperplasia and marrow production of neutrophils should be adequate to allow maturation of neutrophils before release into blood. Tissue demand for neutrophils also tends to decrease during recovery.

Myeloid hyperplasia of the bone marrow is expected with inflammation of greater than 2 to 3 days’ duration. Bone marrow sampling is seldom indicated in patients with inflammatory diseases because a leukocytosis and left shift are usually present, and these indicate the marrow is active. Persistent, moderate to severe leukopenia in a dog or cat with inflammatory disease is unexpected and thus may be an indication to examine the bone marrow for the cause (see Chapter 2).

Obviously factors other than neutrophil counts affect prognosis, such as the cause of the disease and site of inflammation. However, the neutrophil counts reflect the current balance of effective bone marrow production and tissue demand. If the bone marrow is responding typically to an inflammatory process with a mild to moderate neutrophilia and mild to moderate left shift, the prognosis is relatively good. Leukocytosis in dogs is usually less than 40,000 WBCs/µl. In 182 canine CBC exams with leukocytosis, 151 (83%) had 17,500 to 39,990 WBCs/µl. Leukocytosis in this range is thus mild to moderate and suggests a favorable prognosis. Only 5% had marked to extreme leukocytosis of 61,050 to 127,500 cells/µl. Leukemoid reactions of over 50,000 to 60,000 WBCs indicate a poor prognosis because, even in the presence of excessive numbers of leukocytes (usually neutrophils), the cause of the inflammatory response is not corrected. The magnitude of feline leukocytosis is usually less than that in dogs (i.e., 70% of cases are < 30,000 WBCs/µl). The severity of eosinophilia in eosinophilic inflammation is less than neutrophilia during neutrophil inflammation. Therefore, a leukemoid reaction of eosinophils (due to strong eosinophil inflammation, not leukemia or hypereosinophilic syndrome) is diagnosed when there are more than 25,000 to 30,000 eosinophils/µl.

(see also later discussion of Toxic Neutrophils). A degenerative left shift, leukopenia, neutropenia, lymphopenia, leukemoid reaction, or a combination thereof is an atypical, unexpected response to inflammatory disease indicating severe disease, toxemia, severe stress, inadequate bone marrow production, problems interfering with an effective response, or a combination of these. A degenerative left shift has more nonsegs than segs, regardless of total leukocyte count. Finding more immature than mature neutrophils indicates that the bone marrow cannot produce neutrophils at a rate sufficient for them to mature completely prior to release. Either tissue demand for neutrophils has escalated dramatically, cell production is decreased, or both. Severity of change and trend over daily CBCs are important in assessing prognosis. A degenerative left shift, severe neutropenia and leukopenia, lymphopenia, and marked toxic change in most neutrophils often suggest gram-negative sepsis, such as a ruptured intestine or parvovirus enteritis.TABLE 4-2LEUKOGRAM FINDINGS INDICATING A POOR PROGNOSISFINDINGREASON FOR POOR PROGNOSISDegenerative left shiftTissue demand exceeds bone marrow's production of neutrophils or causes inadequate time for maturation of neutrophilsLeukopeniaTissue demand exceeds bone marrow's production of neutrophilsLeukemoid reactionEven excessive numbers of neutrophils cannot correct the problemToxic neutrophilsModerate to many, moderately to severely toxic neutrophils are associated with longer hospitalization, higher treatment costs, and increased fatalitySevere or persistent lymphopeniaIndicates severe and persistent stress

Both leukopenia and neutropenia are unfavorable prognostic signs. These findings suggest that bone marrow is incapable of producing sufficient numbers of neutrophils, that tissue consumption of neutrophils is overwhelming, or both. Neutropenia, whether primary (bone marrow disease) or secondary (excessive tissue consumption), severely predisposes the patient to infection and septicemia. Leukopenia is usually caused by neutropenia, but lymphopenia may also cause leukopenia despite normal neutrophil numbers. Lymphopenia usually indicates stress. Severe or persistent lymphopenia indicates severe or persistent stress. In severe leukopenia (e.g., <1000 WBCs/µl), a left shift is not concluded even if all neutrophils are nonsegs, because an increase in the absolute number of immature neutrophils greater than 1000 WBCs/µl is not possible. (Trying to perform a manual differential WBC count is also not necessary because the total WBCs already indicates a neutropenia and lymphopenia, and imprecision of a 25 to 50 ManDiff count with abnormally appearing cells is very great. Automated instrument differential counts are more accurate in severe leukopenia.)

A leukemoid reaction is a marked leukocytosis (>50,000 to 100,000 WBCs/µl) due to inflammatory disease and not leukemia. Leukemoid means leukemia-like because of the magnitude of leukocytosis. A leukemoid reaction indicates a poor prognosis because, despite abundant (and actually excessive numbers of) neutrophils, the inflammatory disease is not being corrected. Causes of leukemoid reactions are often severe localized infections (e.g., pyometra, abscess). Additional causes are IMHA, paraneoplastic syndromes with bone marrow stimulation (e.g., metastatic fibrosarcoma, renal carcinoma, rectal adenoma), rare parasitism (e.g., Hepatozoon canis infection), and neutrophil functional defects (canine leukocyte adhesion protein deficiency [CLAD] of Irish setters).39 With pyometra and some walled-off abscesses, there is an anatomic problem preventing healing. Pus and the infectious agent or other cause cannot drain out of the body, and antibiotics may not penetrate the lesion. With CLAD, dysfunctional neutrophils are incapable of correcting common infections even in high numbers. The leukemoid reaction in IMHA seems an exception, but acute massive destruction of erythrocytes and phagocytosis of debris by macrophages is a strong stimulus for an inflammatory reaction.

Differentiation of a leukemoid reaction from chronic granulocytic leukemia (CGL) is difficult. CGL is rare, so the odds favor diagnosis of a leukemoid reaction when massive neutrophilia exists. Both leukemoid reactions and CGL lack the blast cells or atypia seen in acute granulocytic leukemia (see Myeloid Neoplasms later in this chapter). Left shifts in both leukemoid reactions and CGL often involve mainly bands, and both can have a few more immature forms. Cytologic examination of lymphadenopathy is often a key in diagnosis of CGL. Lymph node aspirates (and even liver or spleen aspirates) with CGL look like bone marrow in having mixed hematopoiesis with a few to moderate number of immature myeloid cells, including myeloblasts. The number of blast cells is not obviously increased, so bone marrow aspirates in CGL are often not diagnostic. The leukocytosis of a leukemoid reaction should resolve after appropriate treatment (e.g., removal of pyometra uterus). Clinical signs of illness, toxic neutrophils, and evidence of diseases that cause leukemoid reactions (e.g., pyometra) suggest diagnosis of a leukemoid reaction. Dogs with CGL have persistent leukocytosis and often do not look sick.NoteA guarded to poor prognosis is indicated by the presence of a degenerative left shift, leukopenia, leukemoid reaction, or moderate to marked neutrophil toxicity.

Toxic neutrophils were associated with increased fatality, length of hospitalization, and treatment costs in dogs.3 The prevalence of pyometra, parvovirus infection, acute renal failure, peritonitis, IMHA, disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC), pancreatitis, septicemia, and neoplastic disorders was significantly higher among dogs with toxic neutrophils. Bacterial infections cause severe toxic changes in neutrophils, such as in secondary bacterial enteritis in parvovirus enteritis. However, toxic neutrophils occur in disease without infection (e.g., IMHA, pancreatitis, chemotherapeutic agents, renal failure). The presence of toxic neutrophils in cats was associated with a significantly higher prevalence of shock, sepsis, panleukopenia, peritonitis, pneumonia, and upper respiratory tract diseases, as were infectious (viral and bacterial) and metabolic disorders.36 Negative findings in cats with toxic neutrophils were milder than with dogs, suggesting that cats form toxic neutrophils with milder diseases than dogs.

Classification of toxemia may be quite detailed3 or more simplified (see Chapter 2). The number of neutrophils that appeared toxic (percentage; or few, moderate, many) and severity of morphologic change should be reported. A few (1+) toxic neutrophils are of minimal importance. However, moderate to many (2+ to 4+) toxic neutrophils should not be ignored (see Figure 2-9). Toxic change in neutrophils, though subjective, is sometimes the only indicator of disease because numerical results of the leukogram appear normal in many cases. A blood smear evaluation by a competent observer should always be included during initial evaluation of a sick patient.

). The classic leukogram pattern from recent corticosteroid treatment or acute stress is moderate leukocytosis with mature neutrophilia, lymphopenia, and eosinopenia. In dogs, mild to moderate monocytosis also may occur (e.g., 2500/µl). Leukocytosis from corticosteroid treatment in dogs may reach a maximum of 30,000 to 40,000 cells/µl, with a predominance of neutrophils, but more commonly there are 15,000 to 25,000 WBCs/µl. Neutrophilia develops in 4 to 12 hours after treatment with a glucocorticoid and returns to baseline values in less than 24 hours. In cats, leukocytosis after corticosteroid treatment is usually a little weaker (e.g., 22,000 WBCs/µl with 18,000 neutrophils/µl), without monocytosis.TABLE 4-3LEUKOCYTE CHANGES IN A DOG TREATED WITH DEXAMETHASONEFRIDAYSATURDAYMONDAYTUESDAYWEDNESDAYWBCs/µl12,20022,20019,60031,10029,300Segs/µl952518,64810,97626,43325,491Bands/µl0019600Lymphocytes/µl1905199850961866879Monocytes/µl6351554215627993132Eosinophils/µl6350117600WBCs, White blood cells.Hematologic data are from an apparently normal dog treated daily with dexamethasone (except on Sunday) to illustrate the corticosteroid and stress response. Data for Friday, the day before treatment began, should be used for baseline (reference) values. Exceptions to the classic pattern occurred every day except Wednesday.

Lymphopenia without neutrophilia is the most common change in the leukogram and usually indicates stress. Chronic stress (e.g., chronic renal failure), long-term corticosteroid treatment, or hyperadrenocorticism is suggested by lymphopenia. The leukogram in chronic stress may seem normal. Stress causes eosinopenia, but normal animals may have few eosinophils so that eosinopenia is often overlooked. Stress or corticosteroid treatment can help explain the lack of eosinophilia in patients with eosinophilic inflammatory diseases.NoteGlucocorticoids (endogenous stress or treatment) have prominent effects on the leukogram. Lymphopenia is the most common alteration in the leukogram of dogs and cats and reflects chronic stress or long-term corticosteroid treatment. The acute glucocorticoid effect is classically a mature neutrophilia, lymphopenia, eosinopenia, and in dogs a monocytosis peaking at 4 to 12 hours post-treatment.

). In addition, neutrophils are shifted from the marginal pool (hidden) to the circulating pool (where they are included in blood collected by venipuncture). A left shift is not expected with stress or corticosteroid treatment because neutrophil release from the bone marrow is usually too mild to stimulate release of bands and metamyelocytes in the presence of a normal bone marrow storage pool of neutrophils.TABLE 4-4EFFECTS OF CORTISONE ON CANINE GRANULOCYTESGRANULOCYTE COUNT (cells/µl)TBGP (×107/kg) (hours)GRANULOCYTE TURNOVER RATE (×107 cells/kg/day)Control5600 (3.0-8.4 × 103)88 (53-112)5.3 (3.8-6.3)301 (157-468)Treated13,800 (8.7-30.1 × 103)162 (67-269)7.6 (6.0-0.2)352 (136-438)Values are given as mean (range). Neutrophilia in the cortisone-treated dogs is reflected by an increased granulocyte count, which is approximately the absolute neutrophil count. The total blood granulocyte pool (TBGP) is the total number of granulocytes (mainly neutrophils) in the body and is based on body weight. It illustrates a true increase in the neutrophils in the blood of dogs treated with glucocorticoids. The circulating half-life () of neutrophils illustrates that neutrophils accumulate in the vascular system because of a longer life span. The granulocyte turnover rate documents an increased release of neutrophils from the bone marrow.From Boggs DR, Winkelstein A: White cell manual, ed 3, Philadelphia, 1975, FA Davis.

Nuclear hypersegmentation of neutrophils (called a right shift) is more likely because corticosteroids decrease emigration of and prolong the circulating half-life of neutrophils in the blood. As neutrophils age, progressive nuclear hypersegmentation or lobulation develops. Hypersegmented neutrophils have five or more nuclear lobes.

Acute corticosteroid-induced changes are transient; therefore, one or more of the expected changes may not be seen depending on how long after treatment the sample was taken. Maximal leukocyte changes occur at 4 to 12 hours and may be normalized by 24 hours. For example, Table 4-3 presents hematologic data from a healthy dog treated daily with dexamethasone (except Sunday). One day after initial treatment (Saturday), five of the expected steroid-stress features occurred (i.e., leukocytosis, neutrophilia, no left shift, eosinopenia, monocytosis). Lymphopenia was not present. On day 3 (Monday with no dexamethasone treatment on Sunday) there was lymphocytosis, monocytosis, and eosinophilia most resembling physiologic leukocytosis (described next). Only on day 5 (Wednesday) was the full classic corticosteroid or stress pattern observed.

Transient physiologic leukocytosis is noted mainly in young, healthy cats during epinephrine release from fear or after strenuous exercise (e.g., struggling during venipuncture). This response is unlike the steroid-stress response described previously. It is incorrect (at least hematologically incorrect) to call this epinephrine-mediated response “stress.” The TBNP remains unchanged, but a sudden shift of cells occurs from the marginal to the circulating neutrophil pool. This tends to cause a neutrophilic leukocytosis. Contraction of the spleen tends to cause lymphocytosis and polycythemia. There is no increased release of neutrophils from the bone marrow, nor decreased emigration of neutrophils from the capillary beds. Physiologic leukocytosis in cats is greater in magnitude than in dogs because cats have a larger marginal neutrophil pool (three neutrophils in the marginal pool for every neutrophil in the circulating pool; see Table 4-1). Physiologic leukocytosis in cats may be significant; the WBC count often reaches 20,000/µl, and neutrophilia may be overshadowed by lymphocytosis (6000 to 15,000/µl).20 Dogs have such weak physiologic leukocytosis that it is seldom recognized clinically. Physiologic leukocytosis has been noted in research dogs that are bled routinely by the same person and an individual animal's reference values are available from previous hematology testing. Then, if they are suddenly exercised or frightened (e.g., new blood taker), the mild increases in WBCs, neutrophils, lymphocytes, and packed cell volume (PCV) can be detected.NoteFear, through the fight-or-flight response, causes an epinephrine-induced leukocytosis, most obvious in healthy young cats. It is an immediate, mild to moderate increase in neutrophils and lymphocytes that subsides gradually over 30 to 60 minutes. Lymphocytosis differentiates this physiologic leukocytosis from a steroid-stress response, which typically has lymphopenia.

Leukopenia and neutropenia occur infrequently in dogs and cats because they have a large bone marrow storage pool of neutrophils. Leukopenia indicates a poor prognosis. Neutropenia is usually caused by excessive tissue consumption of neutrophils during severe inflammation and/or reduced bone marrow production (Table 4-5

). (See also the discussion of bone marrow in Chapter 2 and the discussed of myeloid hypoplasia in the section on Bone Marrow Problems Causing Neutropenia later.) A third cause of neutropenia, which is rare and more theoretical, is a temporary shift of neutrophils from the circulating to the marginal pool, where they cannot be counted. Endotoxin can cause this change. This transient form of neutropenia is actually “pseudoneutropenia,” because the TBNP is unchanged. Rarely, immune-mediated or “steroid-responsive” neutropenia occurs with lupus or some drug treatments.TABLE 4-5MAJOR CAUSES OF NEUTROPENIAAnimals AffectedDOGSCATSConsumption of NeutrophilsOverwhelming sepsis/endotoxemia (important)✓✓Parvovirus enteritis (important)✓✓Salmonellosis✓✓Immune-mediated destruction (rare)✓Bone Marrow SuppressionFeline leukemia virus (FeLV) (important)✓Feline immunodeficiency virus (FIV)✓Parvovirus (important)✓✓Ehrlichiosis✓Bone marrow toxicity✓✓Estrogen (endogenous/exogenous)✓Phenylbutazone*✓✓Phenobarbital✓Cancer chemotherapy✓✓Irradiation✓✓Leukemia (important)✓✓Myelophthisis/myelonecrosis✓✓Immune-mediated destruction of neutrophil precursors (rare)✓✓*Incomplete list of other drugs is in text.(Courtesy of Dr. M.D. Willard.)

During excessive tissue utilization of neutrophils, neutropenia may be severe; this stimulates release of very immature neutrophils, even myelocytes and promyelocytes, from the bone marrow. The left shift is degenerative when nonsegs outnumber segs. An inflammatory process involving a large surface area, such as septic peritonitis, enteritis, or septicemia, tends to cause severe neutropenia and leukopenia. In contrast, localized infections (abscess or pyometra) with pyogenic bacteria usually cause leukocytosis. Gram-negative bacterial infections are often severe and cause consumptive neutropenia. When a degenerative left shift, marked toxic change, and leukopenia occur, gram-negative sepsis should be suspected.

Neutropenia due to overwhelming infection may be difficult to distinguish from that due to bone marrow depression. Neutrophils have a short life span in blood (e.g., 10 hours), so neutropenia develops before anemia or thrombocytopenia. Thus neutropenia without thrombocytopenia or anemia suggests severe inflammation. Bicytopenia or pancytopenia (decreases in cells of two or three cell lines, respectively) suggests primary bone marrow disease. However, overwhelming infection often causes DIC, which causes thrombocytopenia (bicytopenia). Inflammation causes anemia that may exist prior to a severe exacerbation of the disease. Erythrocytes have long life spans, so anemia is often not apparent early in primary bone marrow disease. Primary bone marrow disease may develop insidiously and lack clinical signs, whereas consumptive neutropenia develops rapidly in a very ill animal. A left shift, toxic changes in neutrophils, and rouleaux formation suggest neutropenia as the result of severe inflammation or infection.

Severe, primary neutropenia predisposes the animal to septicemia. Thus neutropenia due to bone marrow disease may first be noted when a secondary infection develops. Neutropenia and leukopenia are side effects of cancer chemotherapy. Neutrophil counts are often lowest 5 to 7 days after initiation of treatment. Neutrophil counts of less than 1000 to 2000 cells/µl require monitoring the patient for sepsis. Sepsis (probably from enteric bacteria) is presumed to be present if the patient has fewer than 500 to 1000 neutrophils/µl and is febrile. It is recommended to suspend chemotherapy with myelosuppressive agents if the neutrophil count drops below 2500 cells/µl or the platelet count is less than 50,000/µl.

Diagnostic testing of patients with persistent, undiagnosed neutropenia includes bone marrow aspiration biopsy, core biopsy, or both. This may detect myeloid hypoplasia, ineffective granulopoiesis, bone marrow necrosis, myelofibrosis, disseminated granulomatous inflammation, leukemia, and other diseases (see Chapter 2). A proper history may reveal treatments or toxins that can affect granulopoiesis (e.g., estrogen or phenylbutazone). Ineffective granulopoiesis confuses many clinicians. The leukopenia is accompanied by normal to increased numbers of myeloid cells (i.e., myeloid hyperplasia). Neutropenia due to myeloid hypoplasia seems more logical. In ineffective granulopoiesis, neutrophils are destroyed in the bone marrow by apoptosis before they mature and are released into the blood. Apoptosis (programmed cell death) occurs in healthy dogs as part of the mechanism to regulate effective neutrophil production. Apoptosis is affected by various mediators, and there is no morphologic change to allow diagnosis of a specific cause. Death of cells within the marrow may be excessive in various infections and drug treatments. Approximately half of feline leukemia virus (FeLV)–positive, neutropenic cats have marked granulocytic hyperplasia indicating excessive apoptosis, whereas half have myeloid hypoplasia suggesting viral destruction of hematopoietic tissue as the cause. Ineffective granulopoiesis may also be an idiosyncratic drug reaction (e.g., phenobarbital).

Damage to or depletion of myeloid cells may cause myeloid hypoplasia (see Chapter 2). Causes of myeloid hypoplasia include parvovirus infection, endogenous and exogenous estrogen toxicosis in dogs, Ehrlichia canis infection, cancer chemotherapy, irradiation, and idiosyncratic reactions to drugs such as phenylbutazone, trimethoprim-sulfadiazine, or chloramphenicol (see Chapter 3). Immune-mediated neutropenia has not been well proven in dogs and cats, but steroid-responsive neutropenias have been described.

Neutropenia may occur from laboratory error. The AutoDiff may be checked by inspection of the instrument's leukocyte graphics (see Chapter 2) or by screening the blood smear. When in doubt, a full ManDiff should be performed. The total WBC count is seldom wrong, but instrument flags should alert the operator to a problem. Prominent leukocyte aggregation is uncommon but indicates the WBCs were not evenly distributed in the EDTA sample and therefore the WBC count may be incorrect. In such cases new blood samples with different anticoagulants should be obtained and analyzed without delay. Blood specimens from intravenous fluid administration lines may have excessive dilution by the fluid.

Parvovirus enteritis may be associated with leukopenia, neutropenia with severe toxic changes, and lymphopenia. Parvovirus infects and destroys rapidly dividing cells (e.g., intestinal crypt epithelium, lymphoid tissue, hematopoietic cells). Massive neutrophil exudation through the damaged mucosa contributes to leukopenia, as does hematopoietic cell damage in the bone marrow. Leukopenia is transient and usually early in canine parvovirus disease, so it may be missed without multiple CBCs. Mast cells from the inflamed gut may be detected in blood smears. The mast cells come from damaged intestinal mucosa and do not indicate mast cell neoplasia. Neutrophilic leukocytosis is expected with recovery. During periods of intense granulopoiesis, a leukemoid reaction or other disturbances of normal cell maturation may occur. With complete clinical recovery, baseline leukogram values are regained. Diagnosis of parvovirus enteritis is discussed in Chapter 9. Panleukopenia in cats has a similar hematologic response.

FeLV infection diagnosis and associated disorders are described in Chapter 15. FeLV causes many different hematologic changes, including cytopenias, such as neutropenia.9 Feline immunodeficiency virus (FIV) infection is also associated with cytopenias (i.e., neutropenia, anemia, thrombocytopenia). Therefore, any hematologic abnormality in a cat indicates testing for FeLV and FIV.

Cyclic hematopoiesis (i.e., gray collie syndrome, cyclic neutropenia) is an autosomal recessive disease characterized primarily by cyclic neutropenia with 11- to 12-day cycles, described originally in silver-gray collie pups. Neutropenia as severe as 0 to 400/µl predisposes affected collies to life-threatening bacterial infections. A stem cell defect causes cyclic decreases in production of platelets, other granulocytes and monocytes, and erythrocytes (i.e., reticulocytes). Because of a longer half-life of platelets and erythrocytes, numerical change in these cells is less noticeable than for neutrophils. Cyclic hematopoiesis, often with a more irregular periodicity, also has been observed in other breeds of dogs, in rare cats with FeLV infection, and after cyclophosphamide treatment of some dogs. Oscillations of neutrophils, other leukocytes, reticulocytes, and platelets occur at 8- to 29-day intervals. Hemograms obtained at 2- to 3-day intervals should document cyclic neutropenia, but daily CBCs may be required to document cycling of other cells and platelets.

Monocytosis occurs in about 30% of hospitalized dogs and 11% of cats. Blood monocytes mature into macrophages in tissues. Macrophages contribute to granulomatous and pyogranulomatous inflammation. Macrophages remove necrotic debris, kill fungi and some parasites, inactivate viruses, attempt to remove foreign bodies, remove senescent and abnormal red blood cells (RBCs), and destroy neoplastic cells. Monocytosis is expected in inflammatory diseases with a high need for macrophages. For example, monocytosis is common in IMHA, in which large numbers of RBCs are destroyed in macrophages. Necrotic cell debris also must be removed to allow tissue regeneration and healing. Monocytosis accompanies suppuration, pyogranulomatous and granulomatous inflammation, necrosis, malignancy, hemolytic or hemorrhagic disease, and immune-mediated diseases.

Although macrophages are a “late” component of most inflammatory processes, monocytosis may occur in both acute and chronic disease processes and monocytosis alone should not be used to indicate chronicity of a process. (See earlier discussion on the canine corticosteroid response, which commonly has a monocytosis 8 to 12 hours after treatment.) If concurrent lymphopenia and eosinopenia are present, a stress or corticosteroid leukocyte response is likely. If lymphopenia and eosinopenia are not present, chronic inflammation or tissue destruction should be suspected. Monocytopenia is not significant. Low numbers of monocytes normally are present in the blood. Monocytes are also unevenly distributed on the blood smear, so imprecision is great with manual monocyte counts. Automated cell hematology analyzers often have difficulty in differentiating monocytes and large lymphocytes. With low numbers of monocytes normally and great imprecision in counting them, a monocytopenia cannot be reliably detected.

Persistent non-neoplastic lymphocytosis usually signifies strong immune stimulation from chronic infection, viremia, immune-mediated disease, or recent immunization. Supportive laboratory evidence of chronic infection (in addition to history and physical findings) may include hyperproteinemia with polyclonal gammopathy; presence of “reactive” lymphocytes; CBC evidence of inflammation; or cytologic or histologic documentation of inflammation, lymph node hyperplasia, or both. Lymphocyte counts up to 17,000 to 30,000/µl have been reported with Ehrlichia canis infection (or 9000/µl in Toxoplasma gondii infection in cats).4 Milder lymphocytosis (e.g., 4500/µl) may be seen during later recovery phases of Anaplasma phagocytophilum infection in dogs. Lymphocytosis may not be present in dogs and cats with chronic infections. Lymphocytosis up to 20,000/µl was seen in feline but not canine IMHA. Lymphocytosis up to 13,000/µl and 9000/µl may be seen in canine and feline hypoadrenocorticism (Addison's disease), respectively, although only in 5% to 10% of patients.4 Transient lymphocytosis occurs in physiologic leukocytosis (discussed earlier). Lymphocytosis in feline physiologic leukocytosis is usually under 20,000/µl but may exceed 36,000/µl.40 The previous examples of lymphocytosis were often maximal values and not commonly expected values. Maximal values are useful in differential diagnosis of lymphoid leukemia but should not exclude diagnosis of other causes of lymphocytosis.

Reactive lymphocytes are large, immune-stimulated lymphocytes with dark-blue cytoplasm and irregular, scalloped, or cleaved nuclei. They are also called immunocytes, virocytes, and variant lymphocytes. In contrast, blast-transformed lymphocytes have a large nucleus with a light, dispersed chromatin pattern with prominent nucleoli or nucleolar rings. Rare reactive lymphocytes are visible in blood smears from healthy animals, whereas a few to several reactive lymphocytes may occur in blood smears from sick or recently vaccinated animals. Reactive lymphocytes are not of special diagnostic significance. The number of reactive lymphocytes does not consistently reflect the degree of immune stimulation, nor is it pathognomonic for any specific disease. Reactive blast-transformed lymphocytes may appear unusually numerous, large, or active (especially in young animals) and may be been mistaken for lymphoid leukemia. Reactive lymphocytes may confuse staging or diagnosis of recurrence of disease in patients with lymphoma.

Severe stress or exogenous corticosteroid administration (see Stress and Corticosteroid Response earlier) usually causes lymphopenia and eosinopenia. Lymphopenia is also expected early in inflammation (see Figure 4-5), and the return of the lymphocyte count to normal is a good prognostic sign indicating recovery from the stress of inflammation. Lymphopenia occurs in some viral diseases by direct viral damage of lymphoid tissue and through lymphocyte redistribution from stress or antigen exposure. Canine viral diseases causing lymphopenia include distemper, infectious canine hepatitis, parvoviral enteritis, and coronavirus enteritis. Cats may have lymphopenia in panleukopenia and FeLV infection.

Loss of lymphocyte-rich lymph has been stated to cause lymphopenia. Examples include chylothorax in dogs and cats, protein-losing enteropathy and lymphangiectasia in dogs, and disruption of normal lymphatic circulation by inflammatory, infectious, or neoplastic diseases in both species.18

Age affects the lymphocyte count. Younger animals usually have higher counts. For example, the minimal lymphocyte counts expected in dogs of various age categories are 2000/µl from 3 to 6 months of age; 1500/µl from 8 to 24 months of age; and 1000/µl over 24 months of age. Thus one uses different lymphocyte counts to indicate lymphopenia in young dogs.

Eosinopenia may be difficult to document by routine WBC counts. Eosinophils may be too few to be observed in leukocyte differential counts of normal animals, so reference values may go down to 0. Variation expected with a 100-cell, manual differential leukocyte count when 2% of a cell type (e.g., eosinophils) is present is 0% to 8% (95% confidence interval).34 Eosinopenia in a sick animal may be likely if 0% eosinophils are seen and if concurrent lymphopenia is present. The most common causes of eosinopenia are severe stress associated with illness and response to corticosteroid administration.

Pseudoeosinopenia in many greyhounds, other sight hounds, and occasionally other breeds of dogs may result from misidentification of “vacuolated” or “gray” eosinophils. Instead of having red-orange granules, gray eosinophils have only clear-staining granules that look like empty vacuoles. Alternatively, vacuolated eosinophils may have mainly vacuoles with occasional typical red-orange granule or hints of red in mainly clear granules. It is often uncertain if there are empty vacuoles from degranulation or if the granules are unstained. The clear, unstained granules in the greyhound eosinophil may be seen as granules and not empty vacuoles on electron microscopy. Hematology instruments (e.g., Advia 2120) may occasionally fail to detect eosinophils in some samples.

Eosinophilia usually indicates eosinophilic inflammation. However, eosinophilic inflammation in tissues is often unaccompanied by detectable eosinophilia in blood because eosinophils have a very short half-life in blood. Cytology or histology will document the eosinophilic inflammation in tissues (e.g., lung, skin, gut). Eosinophilia is an increase in eosinophils over the laboratory's reference values, which may vary from less than 750 to less than 1300/µl eosinophils in dogs and less than 750 to less than 1500/µl in cats. Over 5000/µl eosinophils is a very strong response and may be termed hypereosinophilia. A leukemoid reaction of eosinophils (due to strong eosinophil inflammation but not leukemia or hypereosinophilic syndrome) is concluded when there are more than 25,000 to 30,000 eosinophils/µl. The rottweiler and German shepherd breeds have greater reference values for eosinophils and more eosinophilic diseases.22 The rottweiler has a tendency to develop eosinophilic diseases such as hypereosinophilic syndrome and eosinophilic meningoencephalitis. Siberian huskies and Alaskan malamutes also have increased frequency of pulmonary infiltrates with eosinophils (PIE; pulmonary bronchopneumopathy; eosinophilic pneumonia), eosinophilic pulmonary granulomatosis, and oral eosinophilic granuloma. Cavalier King Charles spaniels are predisposed to eosinophilic granuloma and eosinophilic stomatitis.

Eosinophils kill parasites, regulate the intensity of hypersensitivity reactions mediated by immunoglobulin E (IgE) antibodies, and may promote inflammation and tissue damage.10 Eosinophils kill parasites by attaching to them and forming a digestive vacuole between the eosinophil and parasite. Eosinophil granules contain potent molecules such as major basic protein and eosinophil peroxidase, which degranulate into the digestive vacuole and damage the wall of the parasite or ovum and kill it. A more intense eosinophilic response occurs with parasites within tissues (e.g., heartworms, strongyles, migrating lung flukes such as Paragonimus kellicotti). Endoparasites such as tapeworms or Giardia, which do not invade tissue, generally do not incite eosinophilia. Some parasites may not stimulate eosinophilia until they die and expose previously hidden antigens. Production of eosinophilia is an immune response. The first exposure to a parasite produces a modest, delayed eosinophilia. The second exposure to the same parasite results in an intense, dramatic eosinophilia.

An eosinophilic inflammatory response occurs to certain allergens. Lymphocytes respond to the allergen by producing an IgE-type immune response. IgE binds to mast cells, which triggers an inflammatory response. Eosinophil inflammation unfortunately often damages normal tissue locally. For example, eosinophilic inflammation from inhaled allergens in feline asthma may cause damage to respiratory epithelium. Eosinophils are attracted to inflamed tissue by mast cell products and lymphokines. Eosinophilic inflammation is strongly coupled to mast cells and basophils. Eosinophils may be abundant in mast cell tumors and lymphoma masses because of production of mediators from mast cells or lymphocytes that attract eosinophils.

). However, eosinophilia is often not associated with parasite infestations or allergy. Eosinophilia may accompany other inflammatory reactions; fungal (e.g., cryptococcosis), viral (e.g., FeLV), or bacterial (e.g., Streptococcus or Staphylococcus species) infection; and neoplasia (e.g., mast cell tumor, lymphoma, mucinous carcinomas, fibrosarcomas, eosinophilic leukemia). Hypereosinophilic syndromes can produce severe, persistent circulating and tissue eosinophilia.FIGURE 4-6An algorithm to diagnose common causes of eosinophilia in cats.FIGURE 4-7An algorithm to diagnose common causes of persistent eosinophilia in dogs.

Mast cells are sentinel cells, and are numerous near surfaces such as the skin, digestive tract, respiratory tract, and genitourinary tract. Therefore, the cause of eosinophilia can also be evaluated via a body systems approach. The integumentary system is examined for ectoparasites, dermatitis, or masses. Flea bite allergy is a common cause of eosinophilia in cats. The respiratory tract may be evaluated cytologically by transtracheal wash, bronchial brushings, swabs, or collecting material adherent to endotracheal tubes. Heartworm disease and PIE (pulmonary bronchopneumopathy; eosinophilic pneumonia) are common causes of eosinophilia in dogs (disease incidence varies depending on location). Fine-needle aspiration or surgical biopsy may aid in evaluating dermal or pulmonary masses. Examination of the upper alimentary tract should include visual inspection of the oral cavity for eosinophilic granulomas, especially the eosinophilic granuloma complex of cats and Siberian husky dogs.

Fecal ova examination is inexpensive, though the presence or absence of ova is usually unrelated to the primary cause of eosinophilia. If eosinophilic gastroenterocolitis is suspected, the clinician should consider endoscopic examination, surgical biopsy, and cytologic evaluation of any lesions. Estrus in dogs occasionally causes eosinophilia. Differential diagnosis of very strong eosinophilic inflammatory diseases, hypereosinophilic syndromes, and eosinophilic myeloproliferative diseases may be difficult in some cases without an obvious cause.

Basophils are considered rare in normal dogs and cats. However, basophilia (defined as finding 1 or more basophils during a manual Diff and reported as ≥100/µl or 0.1 × 109/L) was seen in 8% of Swedish canine patients. Extreme canine basophilia of greater than or equal to 2000/µl (2.0 × 109/L) without eosinophilia is rare and can suggest chronic myeloproliferative disease if persistent and combined with prominent thrombocytosis. Automated instruments (i.e., Advia 2120, Cell Dyn 3500, Sysmex XT-2000iV, and LaserCyte) fail to detect canine and feline basophils and thus never detect basophilia. Basophils may be counted as large unstained cells (LUCs) by the Advia 2120. Basophilia of 2% may be missed in manual differential counts because of imprecision of the method. Basophilia must be 3% to 6% to be consistently detected.

Basophilia may not be detected because basophils are difficult to identify. Canine basophils have few, widely scattered purple (i.e., metachromatic) or poorly stained granules, especially with water-based stains. These cells may be misidentified as monocytes or toxic neutrophils (Figure 4-8

). This appearance of feline basophils is unique, but feline basophils may be mistaken for eosinophils with faded granules or monocytes. Feline eosinophils have red-orange, rod-shaped granules, whereas monocytes have blue-gray cytoplasm that is devoid of distinct granules. Infrequently, feline basophils have one or two dark-staining purple granules that facilitate cell identification.FIGURE 4-8A canine basophil and eosinophil are shown. The canine basophil often does not have the distinct, dark-blue granules seen in many other species, but is identified by a long thin granulocyte nucleus and lavender-colored cytoplasm. Granules may stain well with some stains. The canine basophil is often mistaken for a toxic neutrophil or monocyte. The eosinophil has various-sized round granules.FIGURE 4-9A feline basophil has round lavender-colored granules and the not bright-orange rod-shaped granules of the eosinophil. The feline basophil is often mistaken for an eosinophil.

Basophilia is usually accompanied by eosinophilia, and diagnosis is mainly directed toward identifying the cause of the eosinophilia. Basophils are an integral component of hypersensitivity reactions, as are mast cells and eosinophils. Rottweiler dogs have an increased frequency of basophilia but also eosinophilia. Basophils are involved in hemostasis, lipid metabolism, rejection of ticks, and tumor cell killing.18 Basophilia is often caused by parasitism (especially Dirofilaria immitis infection) and hypersensitivity reactions. Additionally, basophilia is associated with lipemia or with canine and feline mast cell tumors, or occurs as a form of chronic granulocytic leukemia.18

Hyposegmentation is decreased nuclear segmentation of granulocytes, which usually indicates immaturity and a response to inflammation. Hypersegmentation presents with excessive lobulation, defined as more than five lobes. This nuclear change reflects more mature neutrophils. Hypersegmentation may be the result of prolonged neutrophil time in circulation, which is commonly associated with corticosteroid treatment. However, genetic developmental abnormalities, nutritional problems, preleukemic or dysplastic conditions, and leukemia may be responsible for nuclear changes. Dysplasia and leukemia are discussed later in this chapter.

Cytoplasmic inclusions, such as Döhle bodies and toxic granulation, may be associated with toxic change in neutrophils. Circulating neutrophils may contain particles phagocytized in blood, such as Heinz bodies, cell debris, opsonized erythrocytes (or hemosiderin), medications, or mast cell granules. Infectious agents such as bacteria (i.e., Anaplasma, bacteremia), protozoa (i.e., Hepatozoon canis, Leishmania spp.), or yeast (i.e., Histoplasma capsulatum) may be found within the cytoplasm of circulating leukocytes (FIGURE 4-10, FIGURE 4-11, FIGURE 4-12

). Rarely, genetic diseases are responsible for a variety of cytoplasmic inclusions. Staining artifacts and precipitate may confuse the observer.FIGURE 4-10A canine neutrophil with Anaplasma phagocytophilum. There are three morula in the cytoplasm, but otherwise the nuclear and cytoplasmic morphology is normal.FIGURE 4-11Two canine neutrophils containing Hepatozoon canis. This was a buffy coat smear to concentrate the number of leukocytes.FIGURE 4-12Two monocytes (left) and two toxic, young band neutrophils (right side of photo) in a 16-week-old Doberman puppy with probable chronic granulomatous disease. The lower monocyte contains two rod-shaped bacteria. The dog had a degenerative left shift with more bands than segs and a moderate monocytosis. The monocytes had many vacuoles and looked activated (blue cytoplasm). It is difficult to differentiate toxic immature neutrophils from monocytes.

Pelger-Huët anomaly (PHA) is an inherited, lifelong disorder of leukocyte development characterized by nuclear hyposegmentation of neutrophils, other granulocytes, and monocytes. Almost all neutrophils resemble bands or metamyelocytes (i.e., absolute leukocyte results look like a severe degenerative left shift) (FIGURE 4-13, FIGURE 4-14

). The characteristic WBC appearance in PHA should be recognized and these neutrophils should be reported as Pelger-Huët cells and not nonsegs to avoid misdiagnosis by clinicians reading the CBC, who may falsely conclude very serious inflammation. The nuclear chromatin pattern of PHA granulocytes appears coarse and mature, and the cytoplasm is clear and devoid of toxic changes. Neutrophils function normally, and a predisposition to infection has not been demonstrated. PHA occurs in both dogs and cats and is presumed to be inherited in an autosomal dominant manner.8 However, PHA may be inherited in an autosomal incompletely dominant pattern in Australian shepherds, suggesting that the expression of the anomaly is governed by two or more alleles.19

FIGURE 4-13A canine Pelger-Huët neutrophil has a nuclear shape like a metamyelocyte but a very mature dense chromatin pattern of a mature neutrophil. The cytoplasm is clear and not toxic. A Pelger-Huët neutrophil should be recognized as such and reported as a Pelger-Huët neutrophil and not a band or metamyelocyte, which would mislead the person reading the report.FIGURE 4-14A canine Pelger-Huët eosinophil also has a metamyelocyte-shaped nucleus but with a dense clumped chromatin pattern. Various-sized granules are typical of the canine eosinophil.

Bacterial infection, drug treatment, developing granulocytic leukemia, or FeLV infection may cause acquired nuclear hyposegmentation of neutrophils (i.e., pseudo-PHA). True PHA can be confirmed by finding the anomaly in blood smears of parents, siblings, or other relatives or by proving inheritance of the trait by prospective breeding trials. True PHA has persistent nuclear changes on repetitive blood smear analysis and no clinical signs.

Chédiak-Higashi syndrome (CHS) occurs as an autosomal recessive trait in Persian cats with yellow-green eyes and a diluted smoke-blue haircoat.46 CHS is associated with fusion of lysosomal granules into large pink cytoplasmic inclusions in neutrophils, eosinophils, and other cells. Coarse clumping of melanin granules is associated with color dilution of the haircoat and irises. In addition, decreased choroidal pigment causes a red fundic reflex and photophobia in bright light. Blood smear examination and the cat's gross appearance confirm diagnosis of CHS. Neutrophil inclusions are positive on peroxidase and Sudan black B stains. In contrast with other animal species, cats with CHS have no predisposition to infection. Cats with CHS have an increased bleeding time secondary to mild platelet dysfunction, however. Hemostasis may be prolonged slightly after trauma, venipuncture, or elective surgery.

A staining anomaly of neutrophils stained with Romanowsky-type stains is an autosomal recessive trait in Birman cats.46 The usually neutral-staining granules of neutrophils instead stain prominently, similar to granules in progranulocytes (Figure 4-15

). The defect is asymptomatic but needs to be differentiated from toxic granulation and mucopolysaccharidosis (MPS) types VI and VII.FIGURE 4-15A Birman cat neutrophil granulation anomaly with prominent granules resembling the staining of granules in progranulocytes in the bone marrow.

Storage diseases are rare inherited enzyme defects that cause accumulation of intermediate metabolites of complex molecules within cellular lysosomes. Depending on the nature of the metabolite and its affinity for Romanowsky-type stains, cellular inclusions may appear purple and stringy, as in MPS VI (i.e., Maroteaux-Lamy syndrome) of cats or MPS VII of dogs, or may appear as clear vacuoles in leukocytes in cats with lysosomal acid lipase deficiency. The characteristic purple granules of MPS can be differentiated from toxic granulation, because cytoplasmic basophilia is absent and toxic granulation is uncommon in dogs and cats. Lysosomal storage diseases often are associated with progressive central nervous system or skeletal disease but may be identified on a CBC by observing characteristic inclusions or vacuoles in circulating leukocytes.

Neutrophil function disorders have been reviewed by Weiss.46 Primary neutrophil dysfunctional errors are rarely documented. They may be suspected in animals with a history of recurrent infections in association with a normal to extremely elevated neutrophil count and lack of neutrophil migration into sites of infection as determined by cytology. Diagnosis of a primary neutrophil dysfunction requires excluding common causes of immune suppression or secondary neutrophil dysfunction such as stress, glucocorticoid treatment, nutritional deficits, endocrine changes (e.g., late luteal phase of estrus in bitches), or various infections. Neutrophil function tests include neutrophil adherence, chemotaxis, phagocytosis, bactericidal activity, or a combination thereof. Tests of neutrophil function are labor intensive, take a long time to perform and are thus expensive, and are available only through a few specialists or research laboratories to which the animal must be referred for diagnosis.

Canine adhesion protein deficiency (i.e., canine leukocyte adhesion molecule deficiency [CLAD], canine granulocytopathy syndrome) occurs infrequently in Irish setter and Irish setter–cross puppies. CLAD is an autosomal recessive disease. Affected puppies have recurrent bacterial infections before 12 weeks of age. Leukogram abnormalities often include a leukemoid reaction (e.g., up to 208,000 cells/µl). Fluids from sites of infection contain few neutrophils, because they are less able to emigrate from the microvasculature to the sites of infection. Neutrophils lack CD11/CD18 adhesion proteins on the plasma membrane surface, which normally facilitate phagocytosis of organisms and cell emigration from blood vessels.39

Chronic respiratory disease in eight closely related Doberman pinschers was attributed to impaired neutrophil bactericidal activity.7 Neutrophils phagocytized bacteria normally but were unable to kill them. Immunoglobulin concentrations, complement concentrations, and mitogen-stimulated lymphocyte transformation were normal. Septicemia, monocytosis, and a degenerative left shift are shown in a 16-week-old Doberman puppy in a litter of Swedish puppies with likely chronic granulomatous disease of Doberman pinschers (see Figure 4-12).

In addition to neutropenia in cyclic hematopoiesis of gray collies, a bactericidal defect due to myeloperoxidase deficiency has been described.46 An acquired myeloperoxidase deficiency was noted in dogs with severe consumption of neutrophils in inflammatory diseases such as parvovirus enteritis, pyometra, pyothorax, and pneumonia.17 This caused a misclassification of neutrophils as monocytes by the Advia 2120 (Figure 4-16

). The Advia uses size of leukocytes and peroxidase staining for its AutoDiff. The percentage of neutrophils misclassified as monocytes was used to grade the deficiency of myeloperoxidase. Grade 3 (worst deficiency) had greater than 50% of neutrophils misclassified as monocytes (see Figure 4-16). Neutrophil function in these dogs was not evaluated.FIGURE 4-16Acquired myeloperoxidase deficiency in dogs is seen with severe inflammatory diseases and may be detected and the severity graded by the magnitude of an error in the Advia 2120 classification of neutrophils. The Advia uses size (y axis) and peroxidase staining (x axis) of leukocytes to perform an automated differential leukocyte count. In this peroxidase dot plot, the red dots are neutrophils but about half of the neutrophil cluster (in red oval) was classified as monocyte (green dots) reflecting decreased peroxidase activity in the neutrophils. The number of neutrophils misclassified as monocytes reflects the severity of decrease in peroxidase.17 Over half the neutrophils being incorrectly classified as monocytes was used to indicate the worst grade of myeloperoxidase deficiency. The Advia monocyte count was 40% in this blood sample, but the manual monocyte count was only 11%.

Acquired neutrophil dysfunction has been reported in a few dogs with poorly regulated diabetes mellitus, pyoderma, demodicosis, protothecosis, and lead toxicosis. A lack of pyuria (no neutrophils seen) is noted in some dogs with diabetes mellitus or hyperadrenocorticism in which bacteria may be cultured from cystocentesis samples. This suggests a defect in neutrophil migration in those diseases. In cats, neutrophil dysfunction has been documented infrequently in FeLV infection and feline infectious peritonitis.46

The proliferative responses of leukocytes previously discussed arise from the purposeful need to replace missing circulatory cells primarily related to increased utilization or consumption. The bone marrow in this condition demonstrates hyperplasia. Other hematopoietic cell proliferations may either be poorly regulated with abnormal development and morphology, known as myelodysplasia, or be nonpurposeful, unregulated new growth, recognized as neoplasia. Malignant neoplasia of blood cells is termed leukemia, literally meaning “white blood” from the observed large buffy coat. Leukemia reflects an abnormal population of hematopoietic cells found within the blood or bone marrow as opposed to solid tissues, such as lymph nodes, spleen, or liver.

Criteria used by some to designate significant dysplasia involve having greater than 10% dysplastic cells in one or more hematologic cell lines in the bone marrow and concurrent cytopenia in the blood.44 Morphologic abnormalities of hematopoietic cells may occur under benign or neoplastic conditions (Table 4-6

).TABLE 4-6FORMS OF MYELODYSPLASIA AND ASSOCIATED CONDITIONSGENERAL CATEGORYASSOCIATED CONDITIONSCongenital myelodysplasiaToy and miniature poodles (erythrocytes and precursors)Cavalier King Charles spaniels (platelets)Giant schnauzers (neutrophilic precursors)Secondary MDSDrugs: azathioprine, cyclophosphamide, cytosine arabinoside, vincristine, chloramphenicolInfectious agents: FeLV, FIV, FIPNutritional deficiencies: folate, cobalamin receptor defect in giant schnauzersImmune-mediated disease: immune-mediated anemia/thrombocytopeniaMalignant diseases: lymphoma, plasma cell myeloma, lung adenocarcinomaPrimary MDSIdiopathic clonal defectsFeLV, Feline leukemia virus; FIP, feline infectious peritonitis virus; FIV, feline immunodeficiency virus; MDS, myelodysplastic syndrome.

Inherited myelodysplasia exists in breeds such as toy and miniature poodles with enlarged erythrocytes and their precursors, or in Cavalier King Charles spaniels with abnormally large platelets related to an autosomal recessive defect. These dogs have no clinical signs, and the dysplastic findings are usually incidental.

This form of myelodysplasia is not a neoplastic condition but one that is acquired secondary to another disease or condition and is the most common form of dysmyelopoiesis, accounting for nearly 5% of bone marrow disorders reported in a recent canine study.45 This may be associated with drug-induced and nutritional problems that are reversible once the inciting cause is removed. Some myelodysplasia occurs with certain feline viral infections and is commonly noted with immune-mediated disease. For example, in IMHA, exuberant production of erythrocytes may occur related to the rapid and poorly regulated development, resulting in nucleated red cells with excessive cytoplasm and an eccentrically, not centrally placed, nucleus (Figure 4-17

FIGURE 4-17Secondary myelodysplasia of three nucleated erythroid precursors is depicted in a sample from a dog with a strongly regenerative spherocytic immune-mediated hemolytic anemia. Notice the faint basophilic stippling in the precursor (far right) and abundant cytoplasm in all three rubricytes.

Leukemia may be suspected based on extreme increases in WBC concentration numbers or relative to morphology that is atypical or markedly immature for the cell type. Lymphoid or myeloid (nonlymphoid) cells may be involved in leukemia. Common causes of leukemia include (1) virus infections, such as FeLV, which may affect progenitor cell development; (2) genetic abnormalities, inherited or acquired, that lead to altered cell growth; (3) defective immune systems, such as with FIV infection, that do not permit normal defense mechanisms against leukemia; (4) chemicals (e.g., benzene, therapeutic drugs), which have rarely been associated with leukemia; and (5) radiation, which may alter the health of progenitor cells.

Clinical signs of leukemia vary. Common signs include lethargy, pale mucous membranes, anorexia, weight loss, fever, frequent infections, icterus, and abnormal bleeding such as petechiae. Physical findings often include hepatosplenomegaly, lymphadenopathy, or tonsillar enlargement.

Strong laboratory indicators of leukemia include marked leukocytosis of a monomorphic cell type, the presence of many blast cells, or morphologic irregularities in shape or size of late-stage forms. A prominent buffy coat may be noted when measuring the PCV related to a marked leukocytosis or thrombocytosis. Blast cells have a large round nucleus, fine chromatin pattern, and one or more prominent nucleoli. Reactive and blast-transformed lymphocytes are often present in small numbers (e.g., 1 to 5/blood smear) and are not diagnostic. Numerous reactive and blast-transformed lymphocytes may occur in ill, nonleukemic animals (e.g., 1% to 5% of WBCs) and may mimic leukemia. Rare mitotic figures do not indicate leukemia because mitotically active cells such as rubricytes, promyelocytes, myelocytes, monocytes, and reactive lymphocytes are encountered in nonleukemic animals. Recognition of the subtle morphologic irregularities may be difficult. Abnormalities include megaloblastic erythroid precursors that have an excessive amount of cytoplasm and unusual nuclear chromatin pattern, enlarged segmented neutrophils with many nuclear lobes (i.e., macropolycytes), enlarged highly vacuolated platelets, or dwarf megakaryocytes, and asynchronous maturation wherein the degree of maturity of nucleus and cytoplasm differ.

White cell counts in leukemia are variable, ranging from leukocytosis to leukopenia, or even within normal limits. Anemia is often nonregenerative, but rarely hemolysis is found in some forms of leukemia. Thrombocytopenia, or less commonly thrombocytosis, is associated with the other hematologic changes. Laboratory tests used to diagnose hematopoietic neoplasia or myelodysplasia and evaluate the extent of involvement include bone marrow evaluation, biochemical profiles, cytology, serology, and urinalysis, in addition to hematology. If changes in the blood are not diagnostic, bone marrow examination may confirm leukemia. Blast cells are often found in much higher numbers in marrow than in blood. Bone marrow evaluation should involve optimally an aspirate and core biopsy with concurrent peripheral blood evaluation. Cytology of effusions or solid tissue masses may help to determine a primary source. Serology is indicated for evaluation of leukemia-causing viruses. Protein evaluation of the serum and urine is helpful in determining the presence of gammopathies associated with lymphoproliferative conditions (see Chapter 12).NoteLeukemia is less common than other causes of alterations in leukocyte numbers and morphology. Stress, inflammation, and reactive lymphocytes are much more common.

The following information is for those choosing to treat hematopoietic neoplasia and who need a more specific diagnosis for treatment choices. Definitive diagnosis of specific leukemias usually requires a veterinary clinical pathologist. Slide review from routine CBC or bone marrow cytology with Wright-stained smears of EDTA-anticoagulated blood may allow morphologic differentiation of the cellular origin, such as lymphoid versus myeloid (i.e., nonlymphoid). If cell morphology in a leukemic patient is insufficient to determine the cell lineage, one may use specialized tests (i.e., cytochemistry, electron microscopy, immunocytochemistry, genetics testing) usually conducted at academic institutions or referral laboratories.38 Cytochemistry involves nonimmunologic cytoplasmic markers for enzymes, lipids, or glycogen within the cell.31 Enzymes include peroxidase, found in certain granulocytes, and nonspecific esterases, found in monocytes or T lymphocytes (Table 4-7

) involves staining of specific cell surface antigens by the use of antibodies against CD3 (T cells), CD4 (T-helper cells), CD8 (T-cytotoxic or suppressor cells), CD14 (monocyte progenitors), CD21 (B cells), and CD79 (B cells).28 Blood and bone marrow specimens for these special procedures require specific instructions in handling, preparation, and fixation. Therefore, the clinical pathologist should be consulted to avoid delay in diagnosis caused by improper sampling or sample handling. Even more specialized diagnostic tests are available that involve genetic testing such as clonality (e.g., polymerase chain reaction for antigen receptor rearrangement [PARR]) for lymphoid neoplasms and detection of cytogenetic abnormalities for all hematopoietic neoplasms.6, 42

TABLE 4-7SELECTED CYTOCHEMICAL STAINS FOR IDENTIFICATION OF CELL TYPES IN CANINE AND FELINE LEUKEMIASSTAINCELLS THAT STAINPeroxidaseNeutrophils—all stages positiveMonocytes—weakly positive when presentEosinophils—positive in dog, negative in catSudan black BNeutrophils—all stages positiveMonocytes—weakly positive when presentEosinophils—positive in dog, negative in catLeukocyte alkaline phosphataseNeutrophils—myeloblasts, strongMonocytes—monoblasts, weak or rare in dogsLymphocytes—subset of B cellsEosinophils—between the granules in catBasophils—weak or occasional stainingChloroacetate esteraseNeutrophils—strongly positiveBasophils—moderately positiveMast cells—variably positiveMegakaryocytes—weakly positive when presentAlpha-naphthyl butyrate esteraseMonocytes—diffuse positiveLymphocytes—focal positive in T cellsMegakaryocytes—diffuse positiveNonspecific esterase + fluoride*Lymphocytes—positive in dog, variable in catMegakaryocytes—weakly positive in dogPeriodic acid–SchiffNeutrophils—all stages positiveMegakaryocytes—positive in dog, variable in catMast cells—variably positiveLymphocytes—plasma cellsEosinophils—weak or variable stainingBasophils—weak or variable stainingMonocytes—weak or variable stainingAcid phosphataseNeutrophils—all stages positiveLymphocytes—focal positive in T cellsEosinophils—positiveBasophils—positive in cat, variable in dogMonocytes—diffuse positiveMegakaryocytes—diffuse positiveMast cells—positive*Inhibition of nonspecific esterase with fluoride is used to inhibit or reduce the staining of monocytes.TABLE 4-8IMMUNOCHEMICAL ANTIBODIES USEFUL FOR THE RECOGNITION OF LEUKOCYTE SUBPOPULATIONS IN HEMATOPOIETIC NEOPLASIAANTIBODYLEUKOCYTE SUBPOPULATIONCD1cDendritic cellsCD3T lymphocytesCD4T-helper lymphocytes, canine neutrophilsCD5T lymphocytes, B-lymphocyte subsetCD8T-cytotoxic lymphocytesCD11bGranulocytes, monocytes, macrophagesCD11cMonocytes, granulocytes, dendritic cellsCD11dMacrophages, granular lymphocytesCD14MonocytesCD18Pan-leukocyteCD20B lymphocytesCD21Mature B lymphocytesCD34Hematopoietic stem cellsCD41/61PlateletsCD45Pan-leukocyteCD61PlateletsCD79aB lymphocytesFactor VIII–related antigenMegakaryocytes/plateletsMac387Granulocytes, monocytesMHC IIMacrophages, dendritic cells, lymphocytesMyeloperoxidaseGranulocytes, monocytesNeutrophil specific antigenGranulocytes

Classification schemes for hematopoietic neoplasms were developed and refined over many years, beginning with purely morphologic comparisons such as the French-American-British (FAB) classification system, which separates acute myeloid leukemia into eight subtypes, M0 through M7 (Figure 4-18

), both of which are based on the cell of origin and its degree of maturity as determined by examination of Romanowsky-type (e.g., Wright) stained blood and bone marrow smears. Various classification systems also have been used to classify lymphoid neoplasms. Other classification systems, such as the National Cancer Institute Working Formulation and updated Kiel System, rely on morphologic and immunologic features. Further distinction of leukemia may be determined by cytochemical and immunochemical reactions (Figure 4-20

). The most recent World Health Organization (WHO) classification scheme for hematopoietic and lymphoid neoplasia identifies the different disease types by tumor location plus morphologic, immunophenotypic, and cytogenetic criteria to best determine the clinical prognosis for each disease (Box 4-1

).37 The lymphoid neoplasms involve lymphocytes and plasma cells; the myeloid neoplasms involve the remaining nonlymphoid leukocytes, including mast cells, erythroid cells, and megakaryocytes or platelets singly or in combination; and the histiocytic neoplasms involve macrophages and dendritic cells.FIGURE 4-18Diagram depicting origin of the most common neoplastic disorders of immature hematopoietic cells using the FAB classification. M1-3, Myeloblastic and promyelocytic leukemias; M4, myelomonocytic leukemia; M5, monoblastic leukemia; M6Er, erythroleukemia with erythroid predominance; M6, erythroleukemia; M7, megakaryoblastic leukemia.FIGURE 4-19A scheme to classify immature myeloid leukemias in dogs and cats using the bone marrow erythroid cells from all nucleated cells (ANC). ANC is a group that excludes lymphocytes, plasma cells, macrophages, and mast cells. Nonerythroid cells are calculated as ANC minus erythroid cells. Blast cells include myeloblasts, monoblasts, and megakaryoblasts. AML, Acute myeloid leukemias M1–M5 and M7; AUL, acute undifferentiated leukemia; CML, chronic myeloid leukemias; MDS-EB, primary myelodysplastic syndrome with excess blasts; MDS-Er, myelodysplastic syndrome with erythroid predominance; MDS-RC, primary myelodysplastic syndrome with refractory cytopenia; M6, erythroleukemia; M6Er, erythroleukemia with erythroid predominance.(Reprinted with permission from Raskin RE: Myelopoiesis and myeloproliferative disorders. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 26:1023, 1996.)FIGURE 4-20Simplified classification of acute leukemia using cytochemical stains and immunochemistry. B-ALL, B-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia; T-ALL, T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia; +, positive; −, negative.Box 4-1List of Well-Described Lymphoid and Myeloid Neoplasms Based on the 2008 World Health Organization Classification SchemeLymphoid NeoplasmsPrecursorLymphoblastic Leukemia/Lymphoma (B-, T-, Null-Cell Types)MatureLymphocytic Leukemia/Lymphoma (B-, T-Cell Types)Granular Lymphocyte Leukemia/Lymphoma (T-, NK-Cell Types)Plasma Cell Neoplasia Myeloma Plasmacytoma (Extramedullary Sites)Lymphoma (B- and T-Cell Types of Nodal and Extranodal Sites) Mycosis Fungoides/Sézary Syndrome (T-Cell Type) Marginal Zone (B-Cell Type)Myeloid NeoplasmsMyelodysplastic SyndromesMyelodysplastic Syndrome—Refractory CytopeniaMyelodysplastic Syndrome—Excess BlastsAcute Myeloid LeukemiasAcute Myeloid Leukemia (Myeloblastic, Monoblastic, Erythroid, Megakaryoblastic)Myeloproliferative NeoplasmsChronic Myelogenous/Neutrophilic LeukemiaChronic Eosinophilic LeukemiaChronic Basophilic LeukemiaPolycythemia VeraEssential ThrombocythemiaPrimary MyelofibrosisMastocytosis (Cutaneous and Systemic)Histiocytic NeoplasmsHistiocytic Sarcoma (Dendritic Cell)Hemophagocytic Histiocytic Sarcoma (Macrophage)Canine Cutaneous Histiocytoma (Dendritic Cell)Feline Progressive Histiocytosis (Dendritic Cell)

A system based on the WHO classification of human lymphoid tumors has been suggested for animals.41 This veterinary system separates lymphoid neoplasms by immunophenotype and tumor site location, primarily supported by morphologic criteria, and may provide better prognostic information than previous classification schemes. Histopathology plays a key role in using this system. The lymphoid leukemic forms are classified as acute or chronic. An abundance of blast cells or immature cells identifies the leukemia as acute. Chronic leukemia has a proliferation of differentiated cells that may be difficult to distinguish from hyperplasia (e.g., reactive response). Generally, chronic leukemias have a more favorable prognosis than acute leukemias and therefore patients survive for longer periods of time.

The morphologic criteria to classify acute myeloid leukemia (AML) in dogs and cats was developed previously by the American Society for Veterinary Clinical Pathology (ASVCP).15 The percentage of blast cells was suggested as equal to or greater than 30% of nonlymphoid and nonhistiocytic cells in the bone marrow for AML, whereas chronic myeloid leukemia, myelodysplastic syndrome, and leukemoid reaction would be expected to have less than 30% blast cells (see Figure 4-19). However, this percentage has shifted to 20% to reflect the recognition in humans and animals that the range between 20% and 30% is a gray zone with a strong tendency toward a more aggressive clinical course.37 The AMLs are further separated and a subtype is assigned (M1 to M7) depending on the cell type (see Figure 4-19). Adjectives (e.g., granulocytic or myelogenous, monocytic, lymphocytic; see Figure 4-18) are used to designate the cell lineage. If the cell type cannot be determined, it is simply called an acute undifferentiated leukemia.NoteIn general, lymphoid neoplasms are more responsive to treatment than acute myeloid leukemia.

These lymphoid conditions may originate from solid tissues, such as the lymph nodes (i.e., nodal), alimentary tract, thymus, spleen, eye, and skin, or from the bone marrow, such as plasma cell myeloma or some forms of leukemia. A persistent increase in differentiated lymphocytes over time without reaction to known infectious agents or antigenic stimulants suggests neoplasia in lieu of immune stimulation. Lymphoid neoplasms arranged in descending frequency of occurrence are lymphoma, plasma cell myeloma, chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL), and acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL). The approximate annual incidence rate for leukemias in dogs and cats is 31 and 224 cases per 100,000 animals, respectively. Lymphoid malignancies, including lymphoma, are responsible for over 85% of cat leukemias and over 65% of the dog leukemias. Cats have a 6-fold greater incidence of lymphoma and a 16-fold greater incidence of myeloid neoplasia than dogs, primarily the result of induction of neoplasia by FeLV infection.

ALL occurs less frequently than lymphoma. This rapidly progressive condition occurs mostly in middle-aged dogs (mean 6 years) and frequently in FeLV-infected cats. Because leukemia originates in the bone marrow, ALL may be associated with variable nonregenerative anemia, neutropenia, and thrombocytopenia in any combination. As the condition advances, lymphoblasts are found in enlarged visceral organs such as the liver and spleen. In ALL, lymphocyte size on the stained blood smear varies, with many lymphoblasts. A CBC usually allows diagnosis of ALL; however, bone marrow is more consistently abnormal (i.e., dense infiltration by lymphoblasts). Lymphoblasts are difficult to distinguish from poorly differentiated myeloid precursors without cytochemical stains, cell surface markers, or PCR clonality tests (see Figure 4-20). The presence of CD34 surface antigen is particularly helpful in distinguishing metastasis from an immature solid tissue lymphoma from a blast cell originating from the bone marrow, and this in turn may influence response to therapy. Most feline ALL cases have the T-cell immunophenotype, but canine cases may be T-, B-, or null-cell phenotypes. Hypercalcemia is an infrequent laboratory finding.

Reactive or blast-transformed lymphoid cells on blood smears, especially in young animals undergoing strong immune stimulus (e.g., infections), may confuse the diagnosis of ALL or other leukemias. In many nonneoplastic conditions (e.g., immune stimulation by illness or vaccination), a few to several reactive lymphocytes and blast-transformed lymphocytes (perhaps five per blood smear) may be observed. In contrast, ALL has a predominance of lymphoblasts and perhaps five lymphoblasts per oil immersion field. The use of buffy coat preparations to concentrate the leukocytes to find a few lymphoblasts is not advised, because these preparations often have several blast-transformed lymphoid cells in normal animals.

CLL has a relatively favorable prognosis of continued life for about 12 months after diagnosis. It occurs mostly in middle-aged to elderly dogs (mean 10 years), with a higher frequency in females. Cats rarely have this form of leukemia; most that do are FeLV negative. Differentiation of CLL from ALL or lymphoma with a leukemic blood profile is based on the relatively mature appearance of lymphocytes in CLL versus finding lymphoblasts in the other two conditions. Lymphocytes in CLL are larger than normal and more homogeneous in appearance than in normal animals.

Diagnosis of CLL is aided greatly by magnitude of the lymphocytosis, which may exceed 40,000 to 100,000 lymphocytes/µl. Maximum lymphocytosis in extreme immune reactions (e.g., chronic canine rickettsial infections) seldom exceeds 25,000 lymphocytes/µl and usually is less than 15,000 lymphocytes/µl. Lymphocytosis in cats with strong persistent immune stimulus in nonleukemic diseases may reach higher maximum lymphocyte counts (e.g., 40,000/µl). Reactive lymphocytosis in young, asymptomatic cynomolgus monkeys can reach 70,000 lymphocytes/µl for 1 or 2 weeks. These extreme changes may be called a lymphocytic leukemoid reaction. CLL is the first entity to rule out when lymphocytosis exceeds 25,000 to 40,000 lymphocytes/µl. The likelihood of CLL increases proportionally to lymphocytosis; counts greater than 50,000 to 100,000/µl are particularly diagnostic. Mild normocytic normochromic, nonregenerative anemia is common, with variable thrombocytopenia.

Fine-needle aspirates of lymph nodes, spleen, and liver in CLL document lymphoid proliferation, but differentiation of hyperplasia from CLL may be difficult. CLL has a more homogeneous population, whereas hyperplasia has a more diverse population of lymphocytes, plasma cells, and lymphoblasts. Biopsy and histopathology may better document infiltration by neoplastic lymphocytes with loss of tissue architecture. In bone marrow aspirates, greater than 15% to 20% lymphocytes among the nucleated cells present suggests CLL.

Immunophenotyping has demonstrated many of these cases to be T cell in origin in the dog. Dysproteinemia may occur in dogs with B-cell CLL related to monoclonal gammopathy (most often immunoglobulin M [IgM], but immunoglobulin A [IgA] and immunoglobulin G [IgG] gammopathies also occur). Use of a diagnostic test to determine clonality by analysis of gene rearrangements may be helpful to decide whether lymphocyte proliferation is malignancy or hyperplasia.

A subtype of lymphoid leukemia and lymphoma involves mostly medium-sized lymphoid cells having abundant light-blue to clear cytoplasm that contains several small red or purple granules, termed azurophilic granules. These cells are called large granular lymphocytes (LGLs) and are normally present in the blood of many animal species; specifically in the dog, LGLs are present in 0% to 5% of leukocytes or in 0% to 19% of lymphocytes. The LGL count may be increased as a result of immune stimulation such as seen in canine ehrlichiosis. However, neoplastic proliferations of LGLs are common. In the cat, granular lymphocytes associated with intestinal lymphoma have prominent large coarse purple cytoplasmic granules. In the dog, LGL malignancies may appear as leukemia in the blood or as lymphoma in tissues such as the lymph nodes and spleen. In these tissue forms, blood lymphocyte counts can be normal; however, neutropenia may be evident. The granules do not stain well with aqueous-based Wright stains, such as those found in commercial quick stains. However, the granules appear readily with Wright-type stains. Immunophenotyping of these cells indicate most are cytotoxic T cells expressing CD3 and CD8.

In the dog, LGL leukemia may be first recognized as a benign nontransitory proliferation of granular lymphocytes in the peripheral blood, termed persistent lymphocytosis. These cells are thought to arise from the red pulp of the spleen. As disease progresses, splenomegaly is commonly noted and cytologic aspirates demonstrate a marked increase in the LGL population. Typically, the bone marrow appears normal or contains minimal LGL involvement. Most dogs with LGL leukemia appear as though they have CLL, with a slow indolent course over several years, whereas a small group may have a more aggressive course, similar to ALL.24

Plasma cell myeloma (PCM) is a disorder of bone marrow plasma cells. Extramedullary plasmacytoma occurs in soft tissues (e.g., liver, kidney, spleen, skin). Four diagnostic features of PCM are (1) hyperproteinemia with a monoclonal gammopathy, (2) osteolytic lesions in the spine, (3) greater than 15% to 20% plasma cells in bone marrow aspirates, and (4) Bence Jones proteinuria (see Chapters 7 and 12Chapter 7Chapter 12). Bence Jones proteinuria is infrequent in dogs and cats, and these light chains of antibodies are best identified by electrophoresis of urine with detectable proteinuria. Ehrlichiosis may mimic plasma cell neoplasia in having strong plasmacytosis in the bone marrow and an oligoclonal gammopathy in serum resembling a monoclonal gammopathy.

Histologic or cytologic evaluation of osteolytic areas or soft tissue masses is most diagnostic of PCM (see Chapter 16). Neoplastic plasma cells may exhibit anisocytosis, anisokaryosis, and a finely dispersed chromatin pattern. Binucleate plasma cells occur frequently in PCM, but binucleated plasma cells are normally visible in hyperplastic lymphoid tissue (e.g., lymph node aspirate). Plasma cell leukemia (i.e., neoplastic plasma cells in blood) occurs infrequently.

Lymphoma (formerly lymphosarcoma) is the most common lymphoid neoplasm of dogs and cats. Lymphoma usually originates in peripheral lymphoid tissues but may develop within extranodal sites (e.g., skin) or from bone marrow lymphocytes that populate solid tissues. Multicentric disease is more common in dogs and usually involves the peripheral lymph nodes, spleen, and liver. In descending frequency, other forms of canine lymphoma include alimentary, thymic, and cutaneous disease. Thymic lymphoma is most common in young cats, whereas alimentary lymphoma is more common in older cats. Cats may also develop multicentric, renal, and cutaneous lymphoma. About 60% to 80% of cats with the thymic or multicentric forms of lymphoma are positive for FeLV group-specific antigen, whereas only 30% of cats with alimentary lymphoma are positive.

The CBC is not sensitive in identifying canine lymphoma; 21% of affected dogs have lymphocytosis and 25% have lymphopenia. At the time of diagnosis, up to 57% of dogs may be leukemic.32 Approximately 30% of cats with lymphoma have a leukemic blood profile. The CBC may document concurrent cytopenias, including anemia, thrombocytopenia, and leukopenia. Bone marrow involvement is used in staging lymphoma and so helps to determine treatment. Bone marrow evaluation is needed, because CBC results may not reflect marrow involvement and vice versa. Bone marrow core biopsies are most sensitive in identifying leukemic involvement (e.g., 97% of canine cases compared with 50% by blood smear analysis alone or 60% using bone marrow aspirate biopsies alone).32 Hypercalcemia (i.e., >12 mg/dl), a factor most associated with T-cell lymphomas (see Chapter 8), is helpful in directing diagnostic efforts toward a lymphoid malignancy. Monoclonal gammopathy may occur infrequently with B-cell lymphoma.

Lymphoma is diagnosed daily by cytopathologists (see Chapter 16). Fine-needle aspirates of lymph nodes or other affected tissues and organs usually disclose a homogeneous population of lymphoblasts or larger lymphocytes. If cytology is equivocal in distinguishing extreme lymphoid hyperplasia from early lymphoma, surgical biopsy with histopathology may provide a definitive diagnosis based on alterations of normal tissue architecture. Surgical or endoscopic biopsies of deep tissues also may be diagnostic. This is often helpful in cases of marginal zone lymphoma, a type of B-cell lymphoma with an indolent course that usually presents with a mixed lymphocyte population of cells that mimics the appearance of a reactive lymph node.

Immunophenotyping is useful for prognostic evaluation of lymphoma cases; dogs with T-cell lymphoma are at significantly higher risk of relapse and early death compared with B-cell lymphoma. Diagnostic immunocytochemistry of fine-needle aspirate material (or evaluation by flow cytometry) and immunohistochemistry of tissue sections are performed currently at certain academic institutions (e.g., University of California at Davis and Colorado State University). However, while generally “T is terrible and B is best,” this is not always the case, and prognostic indicators involve other parameters.

In contrast to the mediastinal or thymic lymphoma that is composed of neoplastic lymphocytes and most associated with young cats and dogs, a neoplasm of thymic epithelium, termed thymoma, contains a variable numbers of mature lymphocytes and is usually observed in older dogs and cats. Both neoplasms will present as a cranial mediastinal mass, often with evidence of coughing, dyspnea, or thoracic effusion, including chylothorax. Thymic tumors are associated with paraneoplastic hypercalcemia. Thymoma may involve a concurrent mature lymphocytosis exceeding 25,000/µl of blood and may be confused with CLL. Thymomas are potentially treatable. Surgical biopsy is the preferred method of diagnosis for thymoma, as cytology may be confusing because of secondary chylothorax or the presence of many mast cells.

Mycosis fungoides is an uncommon form of epitheliotrophic cutaneous lymphoma (ECL) usually beginning in the skin and progressing to involve lymph nodes, spleen, and bone marrow. A diagnostic feature of mycosis fungoides is focal accumulation of lymphoid cells within the epidermis, forming “Pautrier's microabscesses.” “Sézary syndrome” is a rare variant of ECL associated with a leukemic blood profile characterized by large T cells with markedly convoluted nuclei.21 The neoplastic cells of ECL are cytotoxic T cells that express CD3 and CD8.

In comparison to the epitheliotrophic mycosis fungoides, nonepitheliotrophic lymphoma is less frequent. This form was previously believed to be of B-cell origin; however, recent findings indicate this is exclusively T-cell lymphoma, although the morphologic and immunologic characteristics differ from mycosis fungoides. Both forms are aggressive and respond sporadically or poorly to treatment.29

Characteristics of selected myeloid neoplasms are described under the following headings (see Box 4-1). Myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS) involve a preleukemic condition as well as a neoplasia of mature and poorly differentiated nonlymphoid cells that display significant dysplasia. Generally, AMLs are severe, rapidly progressive diseases, essentially unresponsive to treatment. In contrast, myeloproliferative neoplasms involve relatively mature cells that are released from the bone marrow and the clinical course may be long. This category also includes the proliferative conditions involving mast cells, such as cutaneous mastocytoma and systemic mastocytosis. In myeloid neoplasia, the leukemic cell type may vary over time in the same animal; therefore, the diagnosis may reflect a specific point in time.

Blast cells of various cell types often lack identifiable characteristics, and the initial impulse is to designate an undifferentiated blast cell as a lymphoblast. Blast cells in myeloid neoplasia are distinguished by sequential differentiation into more mature myeloid cells, if present, or with cytochemical staining of a poorly differentiated leukemia (see Table 4-7). Cytogenetic investigations in animals are beginning to determine chromosomal defects similar to those of people with the same disorders, and prognostic markers may be helpful in treating these conditions.6, 12, 16

Primary MDS is a clonal neoplastic disease, indicating it originates from a single transformed stem cell that affects multiple nonlymphoid lineages such as erythroid, granulocytic, and megakaryocytic precursors. Dysplastic changes may occur as preleukemia (i.e., before the onset of overt leukemia, which may take months to years to develop). This neoplastic condition is best considered as “leukemia in situ,” that is, the defect remains localized to the bone marrow and does not spread or metastasize through the blood to other parts of the body. Generally primary MDS presents as persistent peripheral cytopenia in one or more nonlymphoid lineages together with significant morphologic abnormalities. The bone marrow is typically hypercellular in the affected cell line, and the blast cell percentage is less than 20% of the nucleated cells using the most current human WHO classification scheme.37 Two subtypes of MDS appear to have predictive value in cats, with significant differences in median survival time.44 One subtype, MDS with refractory cytopenia, was defined as less than 6% myeloblasts in bone marrow specimens and demonstrated 11.7 months’ survival, while cats with the other subtype, MDS with excess blasts, defined as 6% to 30% myeloblasts in the bone marrow, survived less than 1 month.

AML refers to a collection of neoplastic disease affecting precursors of nonlymphoid cells. Subtypes M0 through M7 are defined by the cell of origin and the degree of differentiation.30 Cytochemical staining (see Figure 4-20 and Table 4-7), immunocytochemistry (see Table 4-8), or flow cytometry can be used to distinguish the subtypes.2, 43 For example, acute myeloblastic (myelogenous) leukemia (AML-M2) usually consists of neutrophils, but coproduction of basophils and eosinophils may occur. Total leukocyte counts are variable, but extreme leukocytosis may occur. Blast cells are often found in circulation. Severe anemia and thrombocytopenia may accompany AML. Myeloblasts, promyelocytes, and atypical cells denote subtypes M1 to M3. Myeloblasts may have a moderately basophilic cytoplasm with few small azurophilic granules. A disorderly maturation sequence also suggests neoplasia but may occur during repopulation of the bone marrow after cellular destruction (e.g., toxin, parvovirus).

Repopulation of the bone marrow begins with immature cells (i.e., myeloblasts, progranulocytes, myelocytes), without the expected predominance of mature bands and segmenters; this appearance initially resembles leukemia, but progressive maturation eventually restores a normal marrow cell population. Diagnosis may require re-evaluation of the bone marrow after a few days.

Myelomonocytic leukemia (M4) is characterized by combined production of neutrophils and monocytes by the bipotential stem cell, resulting in myeloblasts and monoblasts that equal or exceed 20% of nonerythroid cells in the bone marrow. This is the most common nonlymphoid leukemia. Percentage of monocytes and neutrophils may change as the disease progresses. Moderately severe anemia is expected.

Monocytic leukemia (M5) occurs infrequently. Cytochemical staining may prevent misdiagnosis of monocytic leukemia as ALL. Monoblasts are increased to 20% or greater of the nonerythroid cells of the bone marrow. Monoblasts have basophilic cytoplasm that lacks any obvious granulation; nuclei are irregularly rounded, producing a folded or creased appearance.

Erythroleukemia (M6) involves proliferation of immature and atypical erythroid and granulocytic cells. The erythroid component exceeds 50%, with myeloblasts and monoblasts (together) equal to or greater than 20% of nonerythroid cells. A variant form, called M6Er, consists predominantly of erythroid precursors; in this form rubriblasts exceed 20%. The M6 conditions are more common in cats than in dogs. Severe nonregenerative anemia and dysplastic changes are frequently prominent. Over time, this form of leukemia may change in appearance and progress to involve predominantly granulocytic precursors. It is often associated with FeLV infection in cats.

Megakaryoblastic leukemia (M7) has been reported in both dogs and cats.11 Leukocyte and platelet counts vary, and circulating megakaryoblasts may be found. These cells have a round nucleus and scant basophilic cytoplasm with a ragged irregular cell surface. Platelet morphology is often bizarre, characterized by giantism and abnormal granulation. Diagnosis of this form of leukemia requires positive cytochemical reactions to periodic acid–Schiff, alpha naphthyl acetate esterase, acetylcholinesterase, factor VIII–related antigen, or immunologic markers. Electron microscopy may reveal characteristic alpha granules or early internal membrane demarcation systems. Some previously reported cases have been misdiagnosed as AML-M7 that were more correctly identified as myeloid hyperplasia with myelofibrosis.

This group of neoplasms comprises most of the chronic myeloid leukemias, which appear with a marked increase in numbers of the affected specific mature cell type. Blast cell percentages are less than 20% in the bone marrow, and cytogenetic abnormalities have been documented in rare cases.6, 12

Chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML) and chronic neutrophilic leukemia (CNL) differ from acute granulocytic leukemia in that segmented and band neutrophils predominate. The two conditions are similar to each other except for the presence of the Philadelphia chromosome translocation in CML and not found in CNL. The left shift in CNL may extend back to promyelocytes, and bone marrow myeloid proliferation may involve orderly myeloid maturation with a marked increase in the myeloid:erythroid ratio. This ratio may fall between 4 : 1 and 25 : 1 or be as high as 36 : 1. The bone marrow contains less than 20% myeloblasts of nonlymphohistiocytic cells (see Figure 4-19). Diagnosis of CNL is often based on finding marked, persistent leukocytosis (40,000 to 200,000/µl) and exclusion of a leukemoid reaction, such as inflammatory leukocytosis (discussed earlier in the section on Inflammation). Anemia is mild to moderate and platelet counts are variable. Lymphadenopathy with lymph node aspirates that resemble marked extramedullary hematopoiesis may occur in CGL. The prognosis and response to treatment are better than for AML, with death occurring months after diagnosis because of a blast cell crisis.

Chronic eosinophilic leukemia is a variant form of myelogenous leukemia. This type of leukemia is rare but has been reported in the dog and documented in the cat associated with FeLV infection. It is characterized by a marked, persistent eosinophilia (often > 50,000/µl) and a shift toward immaturity. A moderate anemia may be present. It may be difficult to differentiate from hypereosinophilic conditions (e.g., hypereosinophilic syndrome, allergies, parasitism, eosinophilic inflammatory diseases, mast cell tumors, certain lymphomas). Leukemic eosinophils will leave the bone marrow and infiltrate solid tissues, such as the lymph nodes, liver, and spleen.

Chronic basophilic leukemia is another variant form of myelogenous leukemia that is uncommon and reported to occur mostly in dogs. This form of neoplasia can be distinguished from mast cell leukemia by subtle nuclear indentation, segmentation, or lobulation. In dogs, the cytoplasmic granules in neoplastic basophils may be coarser than those in mast cells. The disorder has been associated with thrombocytosis and anemia. Prognosis is good with treatment.

Chronic myelomonocytic leukemia (CMMoL) is an uncommon disorder in which blast cells of both granulocytic and monocytic lines involve less than 30% of nonlymphohistiocytic bone marrow cells. Cases often display peripheral monocytosis greater than 4000/µl, and dysplastic changes are significant. For this reason, this form of chronic myeloid leukemia is placed in a separate WHO category reflecting the myeloproliferation and myelodysplasia together. Diagnosis is suspected if marked monocytosis accompanies neutrophilia, without indications of an inflammatory condition. CMMoL may progress over time to an AML.

Polycythemia vera (primary erythrocytosis) is a rare disease in dogs and cats involving the neoplastic production of mature, anucleated erythrocytes. Polycythemia is suggested by brick-red mucous membranes related to markedly increased hematocrits (i.e., PCV 65% to 82%). Splenomegaly, if present, is mild. Polyuria, polydipsia, hemorrhage, and neurologic disorders occur in 50% of canine cases. Definitive diagnosis of polycythemia vera requires ruling out other causes of erythrocytosis or absolute polycythemia (see Chapter 3). Diagnosis is based on demonstration of an absolute increased red cell mass, a normal arterial partial pressure of oxygen (Pao

2), and a decreased serum erythropoietin concentration that is measured at specialized laboratories. Renal cysts, pyelonephritis, and tumors must be excluded, because they can also produce absolute polycythemia (i.e., inappropriate secondary erythrocytosis) as a paraneoplastic syndrome with increased serum erythropoietin concentration.

Essential thrombocythemia (i.e., primary thrombocythemia) is a rare chronic myeloproliferative disease characterized by proliferation of megakaryocytes and unregulated platelet production reported in the dog and cat. It occurs unrelated to physiologic or responsive thrombocytosis. Clinical signs include splenomegaly and platelet function abnormalities, such as spontaneous bleeding and thromboembolism (see Chapter 5). Platelet counts are persistently above 600,000/µl and often greater than 1 million/µl, which predispose to microthrombosis and microvascular ischemia. Neutrophilia or basophilia may also be seen.

Primary myelofibrosis (previously idiopathic myelofibrosis) has been termed agnogenic myeloid metaplasia or chronic megakaryocytic-granulocytic myelosis. This uncommon condition results in intramedullary and extramedullary hematopoiesis that is accompanied by a reactive or secondary marrow fibrosis late in the course of the disease. The hematopoietic precursors most involved are granulocytic and megakaryocytic forms, which infiltrate the spleen and liver. Some cases may be mistaken for AML of megakaryocytic origin. The peripheral blood often has concurrent immature granulocytes and erythroid cells, termed a leukoerythroblastic reaction. Erythrocytes may display poikilocytosis with a teardrop formation. Bone marrow aspiration is often difficult, related to the presence of myelofibrosis; therefore, core biopsy is recommended to confirm the diagnosis. Survival varies from months to years, depending on the response to treatment for the nonregenerative anemia.

Mast cell neoplasia encompasses a variety of presentations from an isolated mass to dissemination. Mast cell leukemia may originate in the bone marrow of dogs and is rare. Mastocytemia or systemic mastocytosis may occur secondary to a solid mast cell tumor (see Chapter 16) or may suggest severe inflammatory disorders, particularly parvoviral enteritis. In general, the larger the number of mast cells in blood, the more likely that systemic mast cell neoplasia is present, especially in the absence of enteritis. Mast cells are not expected in blood smears from healthy dogs.5 Normal canine marrow has 0 to 1 mast cell/1000 nucleated cells, and greater than 10 mast cells/1000 nucleated cells in bone marrow smears is considered increased and supportive of hemolymphatic involvement in disseminated mast cell neoplasia.

Mast cell leukemia can be distinguished from basophilic leukemia based on morphologic and cytochemical criteria. The total number of mast cells per blood smear in dogs with enteritis and mastocytemia usually ranges from 2 to 9, but 30 to 90 mast cells per smear can be found. It is rare to find circulating metastatic mast cells from mast cell tumors of the skin in dogs and cats. Circulating mast cells are more common in cats affected with the visceral form of mast cell neoplasia producing diffuse, moderate to marked splenomegaly. Erythrophagocytosis by the circulating mast cells is not unusual, and this may contribute to anemia. Typically, disseminated disease involves the spleen, liver, distant lymph nodes, or bone marrow. Cytology or surgical biopsy documents disseminated mast cell neoplasia best.

Presentation of marked anemia suggests a variant of histiocytic sarcoma, hemophagocytic histiocytic sarcoma, which involves a malignancy of macrophages. Immunologic markers are helpful in making this distinction. Both dogs and cats may present with the histiocytic sarcoma complex of diseases. Solid tissue forms of dendritic neoplasia are seen in the dog as cutaneous benign histiocytoma and in the cat as feline progressive histiocytosis.

1 The disseminated form is very similar to a more aggressive disease known as malignant histiocytosis, which forms multisystem lesions simultaneously. That also arises from myeloid dendritic cells. Older animals are at greater risk, and certain breeds such as golden and flat-coated retrievers, rottweilers, and Bernese mountain dogs have increased incidence.33 Primary sites affected include the periarticular subcutis, spleen, lungs, and bone marrow; secondary sites are the liver, lymph nodes, and kidneys. Anemia, thrombocytopenia, and hyperbilirubinemia are the most common laboratory abnormalities. Cytology demonstrates malignant histiocytes to be large, frequently markedly pleomorphic round or stellate cells with abundant (sometimes vacuolated) basophilic cytoplasm. Nuclei are oval to reniform with lacy chromatin and prominent multiple nucleoli. Multinucleate cells are common, and mitotic figures are often frequent. A prolonged survival may be possible with surgical excision of a localized histiocytic sarcoma.

A hemophagocytic variant of histiocytic sarcoma is associated with a Coombs’-negative regenerative anemia related to marked erythrophagocytosis by the neoplastic splenic red pulp and bone marrow macrophages.27 A similar situation may occur with infectious or inflammatory disease. The more anaplastic appearance of the malignant cells and the lack of a history of concurrent infection may help distinguish malignant histiocytosis from the inflammatory condition. Differentiation of malignant histiocytosis from other neoplasms is confirmed by demonstration of positive histiocytic cytochemical and immunohistochemical markers with negative lymphoid or epithelial markers. Similar-appearing cells may actually be T-cell or B-cell lymphoma when immunophenotyping or gene rearrangement studies are performed. Due to the rapid progression of the disease, prognosis is poor. Other laboratory findings include hypoalbuminemia, thrombocytopenia, and hypocholesterolemia, with the two former findings as negative prognostic variables.