This article is made available via the PMC Open Access Subset for unrestricted research re-use and secondary analysis in any form or by any means with acknowledgement of the original source. These permissions are granted for the duration of the World Health Organization (WHO) declaration of COVID-19 as a global pandemic.

Oral lichen planus (OLP) is a T-cell mediated chronic inflammatory tissue reaction in which presentation can range from asymptomatic plaques to painful, erosive, bullous, or ulcerative lesions. Here, we present a 15 year-old female with a novel CTLA-4 variant, multiple autoimmune conditions, and unusual tongue lesions. Our patient was healthy until 9 years of age when she developed Hashimoto’s thyroiditis. At 11, she developed psoriasis. At 13, she was diagnosed with alopecia totalis and Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) with resultant and persistent anemia, thrombocytopenia, lymphopenia and neutropenia. She had chronic abdominal pain and diarrhea since age 13. Esophagogastroduodenoscopy revealed lymphocytic esophagitis and active duodenal inflammation with increased intraepithelial lymphocytes. Colonoscopy revealed mildly active chronic colitis with eosinophils. Whole exome sequencing revealed a heterozygous c.239delA (p.Q80Rfs*2) pathogenic mutation in exon 2 of CTLA-4. Family history is remarkable: father (splenomegaly and psoriasis) and brother (autoimmune hemolytic anemia) have CTLA4 haploinsufficiency with the same mutation. Abatacept was initiated with re-growth of hair, improvement in cytopenias, improvement in psoriasis, and some reduction of gastrointestinal symptoms. Since her abdominal pain persisted repeat endoscopies after six months of abatacept revealed persistent active lymphocytic esophagitis with some improvement in inflammatory injury in her duodenum and colon. Physical exam revealed glossitis with a gel-like coating and ulceration on her tongue, xerosis along her face and scalp without other abnormalities (Figure). She denied recent dental procedures, appliances, or tongue biting. Her WBC ranged from 3-4 x10^9 cells/L and hemoglobin 9.4-12.7 g/dL. Absolute lymphocyte count ranged from 1.0- 1.7 x10^9 cells/L. Immunologic evaluation revealed low IgA and pan-low lymphocyte subsets (Table). EBV PCR ranged from 430-1,700 copies/mL. Tongue scraping revealed Candida dubliniensis and she responded to 5 days of fluconazole. Two months later, she developed painful white patches along her tongue and subsequent 4 kilogram weight loss recalcitrant to viscous lidocaine, antacids, and 14 days of fluconazole. Incisional tongue biopsy revealed ulceration with underlying granulation tissue with lymphocyte and plasma cell infiltration consistent with OLP (Figure). Periodic acid-Schiff diastase stain and Grocott stain were negative. Aerobic culture was normal. No fungus was isolated within 14 days. Epstein-Barr encoding region in situ hybridization was negative. Two weeks of topical dexamethasone lead to temporary improvement. Her tongue lesions waxed and waned over the following months. Due to persistent psoriasis, methotrexate was initiated without worsening in her tongue lesion. To our knowledge, this is the first case of OLP reported in a patient with CTLA-4 haploinsufficiency. CTLA-4 haploinsufficiency may present with variable clinical phenotypes including increased risk of EBV viremia and malignancies. Therefore, after EBV and malignancy are ruled out, OLP may be a prudent diagnosis to consider in a CTLA4 insufficient patient with unusual oral lesions.

Informed consent: Informed consent was obtained from all individual participants included in the study.IgG (751-1,560 mg/dL)1,170IgA (82-453 mg/dL)45IgM (40-274 mg/dL)57IgE (<88 IU/mL)4CD3 (1,400-2,200/cumm)951CD4 (640-1,200/cumm)586CD8 (640-900/cumm)321CD19 (260-510/cumm)124CD16/56 (180-340/cumm)28Vitamin B12 (211-911 pg/mL)519Zinc (0.55-1.50 ug/mL)0.61

5Director, Division of Intramural Research; Chief, Immunopathogenesis Section/Laboratory of Clinical Immunology and Microbiology (LCIM), Division of Intramural Research (DIR), National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID), National Institutes of Health (NIH), Bethesda, MD, USA

Rationale: Anti-interferon-gamma (IFN-γ) autoantibody syndrome is a rare IFN-γ pathway defect presenting with non-tuberculous mycobacterial disease and other opportunistic infections. Onset is usually in the 4th to 6th decade and is likely due to genetic factors. Here we present an adult female with disseminated mycobacterium avium-intracellulare (MAI), found to have high titers of anti-IFN-γ autoantibody.

Results: A 38-year-old female with no past medical history presented with back pain and was found to have bony lytic lesions. She had anemia with hemoglobin 6.2 g/dL, leukocytosis to 25/μL, peripheral eosinophilia to 1100/μL, elevated inflammatory markers, mediastinal lymphadenopathy, and a right sphenoid sinus abnormality. A bronchoscopy and mediastinoscopy were nondiagnostic. A bone marrow biopsy showed decreased trilineage hematopoiesis without evidence of malignancy. Nasal secretion and sinus biopsy showed granulomatous inflammation with MAI. She developed an abscess in her gluteal area at a site of antibiotic administration, and culture grew MAI. An IFN-γ release assay was nonreactive. An anti-IFN-γ autoantibodies screening assay performed at the Laboratory of Clinical Immunology and Microbiology at the National Institutes of Health confirmed the diagnosis of anti-IFN-γ autoantibody syndrome. She was started on a 4-drug regimen for treatment of MAI with significant clinical and radiographic improvement.

Conclusion: A range of molecular defects in the IFN-γ signaling pathway can result in nontuberculous mycobacterial and other opportunistic infections. Anti-IFN-γ autoantibody syndrome is a rare variant that typically presents in adulthood and can be confirmed by an anti-IFN-γ autoantibody assay.

David Hagin, MD, PhD1, David Buchbinder, MD, MS2, Lisa Forbes, MD3, Jeffrey Cohen, MD4, Ivan Chinn, MD5, Jenny Despotovic, DO6, Jamie Frediani, MD7, Tal Freund, BSc8, Ivan Kirov, MD9, Julie Niemela, MS, MLS10, Susan Price, RN11, Sergio Rosenzweig, MD, PhD12, V. Koneti Rao, MD13

Introduction: B-cell CLL/lymphoma 6 member B (BCL6b) is a transcriptional repressor which shares close similarity with BCL6, binds to BCL6 DNA binding targets, and interacts with as well as requires BCL6 for its repression activity. The precise role and potential molecular mechanism underlying the involvement of BCL6b in the development of primary immunodeficiency and immune dysregulation is unknown. Herein we report four patients with clinical manifestations of immunodeficiency / immune dysregulation, all found to have rare or novel variants in BCL6b.

Results: Patient 1 is a 19-year-old Ashkenazi Jewish female who presented at 9 years of age with Neutropenia and later developed immune thrombocytopenia (ITP) and autoimmune hemolytic anemia and cervical lymphadenopathy (biopsy showed reactive changes). Phenotyping showed a high percent of plasmablasts and a low percent of follicular helper T cells, a pattern which could be consistent with abnormal BCL6 function. Treatments included intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIg), rituximab, mycophenolate mofetil (MMF), plaquenil, and belimumab. No infections have been documented. A heterozygous rare variant in BCL6b (c.1348C>T, p.R450W) has been documented.

Patient 2 is a 12-year-old Hispanic male who presented at 5 years of age with chronic abdominal pain, retroperitoneal adenopathy (biopsy with reactive changes), an abdominal mass, pulmonary nodule (biopsy with cytomegalovirus [CMV] inclusions), in association with pancreatitis (biopsy with CMV inclusions) and CMV viremia. Stage IIB Nodular Lymphocyte Predominant Hodgkin's Lymphoma was diagnosed (11 years of age). Intermittent CD4 T cell lymphopenia was documented. Treatments included ganciclovir/valganciclovir (CMV) as well as doxorubicin, bleomycin, vincristine, etoposide, prednisone, and cyclophosphamide (ABVE-PC) for 4 cycles (lymphoma). A heterozygous rare variant in BCL6b (c.1258C>T, p.R420C) has been documented.

Patient 3 is a 10-year-old Middle Eastern female who presented at 7 years with refractory ITP and later developed Evan’s syndrome and splenomegaly. Immunophenotyping showed B-cell lymphocytosis, low memory CD4 T cells and low NK cells. Treatments included systemic steroids, IVIg, MMF and romiplostim. A homozygous rare BCL6b variant (c.118C>T; p.T373M) was identified.

Patient 4 is a 47-year-old Caucasian female who presented at 40 years of age with recurrent fever, abdominal pain, liver function abnormalities and persistent Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) viremia. Biopsies showed Epstein-Barr encoding region positive (EBER+) T cells in the liver, bone marrow and spleen (underwent splenectomy). Naïve CD4 T cell lymphopenia was documented. Treatments included solumedrol and rituximab. Persistent EBV viremia was the sole infectious issue noted. A heterozygous rare variant in BCL6b (c.793T>G, p.F265V) has been documented.

Mutations of BCL6b appear to be associated with lymphoproliferation and autoimmunity as well as susceptibility to Herpes virus infections. Additional research focusing on characterization of DNA binding sites of BCL6b as well as the downstream expression of associated target genes is needed. These data combined with longitudinal analysis of additional patients with confirmed BCL6b mutations, will help clarify determinants of BCL6b pathogenesis and highlight potential therapeutic strategies.Patient1234Age20y/o female (Ashkenazi Jew)12y/o male (Hispanic)10y/o female (Middle Eastern)47 female (Caucasian)VariantMutationHeterozygous c.1348C>T, p.R450W, 4th Zinc fingerHeterozygousc.1258C>T, p.R420C, 5th Zinc fingerHomozygous c.118C>T; p. T373M, 2nd Zinc fingerHeterozygous c.793T>G, p.F265VGnomad AF0.000031880.000064160.000024060.000008015Polyphen; SIFTProbably damaging; DeleteriousProbably damaging; DeleteriousProbably damaging; DeleteriousBenign; toleratedOnsetAge at onset9y/o5y/o7y/o40y/oPresenting symptomsWeakness, neutropenia, Hashimoto'sChronic abdominal pain and retroperitoneal mass. Lung lesion. Bx - pancreatitis and CMV inclusion bodies + CMV pneumonitis.Refractory ITPRecurrent fever, abdominal pain, LFT abnormalitiesImmune DysregulationHematologicNeutropenia at 9; ITP at 15.5; AIHA at 16.5At 5yr - Recurrent abdominal pain with extensive retroperitoneal, periportal and peripancreatic LAD. At 8yr - Worsening LAD + splenomegaly. Mesenteric LN Bx - paracortical hyperplasia and atypical T cell infiltration. At 11yr - Mediastinal, hilar, and axillary adenopathy. LN biopsy showed lymphocyte predominant Hodgkin lymphoma.Evan’s syndrome, ITP, DAT+ AIHA and pancytopenia, resolved with immunosuppression. Splenomegaly.Splenomegaly. Splenectomy showing granulomas.SkinAlopecia areata - on and off between 9-15. More recent psoriatic rash (per Bx).GIRec aphthous stomatitisIntermittent vomiting and diarrheaUrinaryAge 8yrs - Edema, proteinuria and AKI (Cr-1.6). Bx - Acute tubule-interstitial nephritisEndocrine / otherHashimoto's thyroiditis at 93 mm nodules in lung basesInfectionsViralNoneCMV viremia at presentation (6000 copies). Responded to ganciclovir / valganciclovir.NonePersistent EBV viremiaImmune EvaluationLymphocyte SubsetsNormalFluctuating lymphopenia (mostly CD4 lymphopenia).B cell lymphocytosis (24%, 694/uL),B cell phenotypingLow CD38lowCD24high memory B cells. High % of plasmablast. Increased BAFF-R MFI, increased CD27 MFI, Increased % of class-switched memory cells.High % of CD38high cells (plasmablasts?)Post rituximab – No B cellsT cell phenotypingCD4s - Skewing toward CD45RO+CCR7- Teff. CD8s - absent CD45RO+CCR7+ Tcm. High % of CD45RA+CCR7- Temra cells.Low CD56+ cells, Low CD45RO+ memory CD4+ T cells.Reduced naïve CD4 cellsDNTNormal - 0.97% TCR··+ DNTElevated – 7.6% TCR··+ DNTnormalAntibody levels2015-2018: Elevated IgG between 1507 to 2079mg/dL. Normal IgM.Normal IgG. Low IgM in the past.Normal - IgA 98, IgG 1007, IgM 146Low IgG and Low IgM, normal IgA (post rituximab)AutoantibodiesPositive APLA at 12 (resolved)Positive ANA, anti-dsDNA and anticardiolipin (anti-dsDNA resolved)OtherNormal Treg phenotypingNormal mitogen proliferation. Suboptimal vaccine response.normal mitogen and vaccine titers, normal NK functionPathologyBM BxNormal - 2016Normal - 2013, 20162015 - Megakaryocytic number and maturation compatible with peripheral destructionIncreased EBV+ T cells and granulomasLN BxReactive - 20162015 - Negative for malignancy. 2016 - paracortical hyperplasia + atypical T cell infiltration. 2018 - HD.OtherSkin - Early lesion of psoriasis - 20162016 - Kidney Bx - Acute tubule-interstitial nephritisSplenectomy - necrotizing granulomas, EBV+ T cells.,Liver biopsy - EBV hepatitis with EBV in T cells, erythrophagocytosis

Iñigo Perez-Heras, MD, PhD1, Nerea Dominguez-Pinilla, MD1, Nerea Salmon-Rodriguez, MD2, Javier Blas, MD3, Begoña Losada-Pinedo, MD1, Lucia Vigara, MD4, Angela Manzanares, MD5, Luis Allende, MD, PhD2, Jesus Ruiz-Contreras, MD, PhD6, Veronica Silupu-Rodriguez, MD7, Luis Gonzalez-Granado, MD,PhD8

Introduction: Patients with complement deficiencies represent globally less than 2% of all primary immunodeficiencies (PID). Sometimes, diagnosis is not straighforward and diagnostic delay may cause severe sequelae. We report a case series of 11 patients with complement deficiencies. Aim: To describe the epidemiology of patients with complement deficiencies in a single Institution in Spain, clinical characteristics prior to diagnosis, site of infection and microorganisms involved as well as treatment procedures and outcomes.

Results: Male 36%. Median age at diagnosis 44 months (+/-SD 37). The distribution by defect is: C2 (63%), FI (27%), FH (10%). Infections prior to diagnosis were: Pneumoniae (45.5%, mean 1.5 episodes), meningitis (36%), AOM (36%, mean 1), bacteremia (36%), cellulitis (27%), mastoiditis (18%), septic arthritis (18%).The microorganisms isolated were: S. pneumoniae (70%), N. meningitidis (10%), H. influenzae (10%) and N. fowleri (10%). The patient with complement factor 2 deficiency and N. fowleri infection is almost intact. In adition, one patient developed chronic lung disease (bronchiectasis) prior to diagnosis. All patients were vaccinated with antimeningococcal tetravalent conjugated,MenB, PCV13 and Pneumovax. In adition, all patients were under antibacterial prophylaxis. Concerning autoimmune manifestations, 2 out of 11 patients, both of them with complement Factor I deficiency (18%) had recurrent Henoch-Schönlein purpura (HSP). The reasons for immunological work-up were: recurrent respiratory infections (44%), affected sibbling (18%), HSP (18%), meningitis (10%), atypical site of infection and/or microorganism (18%). Currently, all of them are alive and well since diagnosis without any breakthrough infections.

Conclusion: Not only recurrent infections may lead to diagnosis in PID patients with complement deficiencies, but also autoimmune manifestations. Despite the fact that in our population the vast majority of isolations were typical well-known capsulated microorganisms, we show that Naegleria fowleri infection should prompt assessment for complement deficiency. As our patient has survived to a primary amebic meningoencephalitis (PAM) we can speculate on the role of C2 in PAM survival. However, further studies are needed to unravel the underlying mechanism.

Objectives: We aimed to identify a genetic etiology for an underlying autoinflammatory syndrome in a 3-year-old boy presenting with failure to thrive, rash, and polyarthritis since infancy without significant fevers. The patient’s mother and maternal aunt also had similar symptoms since infancy.

Results: The patient’s first examination showed small and large joint polyarthritis and maculopapular rash. Laboratory results included anemia, positive ANA, negative RF and anti-CCP, mildly raised ferritin, and very elevated platelet level, LDH, ESR, CRP and IgG. He had recurrent diarrhea and tested positive for Campylobacter. INVITAE’s autoinflammatory panel showed two heterozygous variants of unknown significance (VUS): NLRC4, exon 4, c.741_742insAlu (p.Leu247fs) and IL2RA, exon 2, c.76G>C (p.Asp26His).

Genetic testing revealed the same two variants in the patient’s mother and aunt, while unaffected relatives had one or the other (see Figure 1). The patient and mother are HLA-B27+ and have the same 2.8 Mb duplication from 3q28 to 3q29 on chromosomal microarray including IL1RAP. Signal transducer and activator of transcription phosphorylation (pSTAT5) studies showed increased baseline pSTAT5 induction without IL-2 stimulation in patient compared to control.

The patient’s arthritis partially improved with naproxen and steroid joint injections. Given genetic results, subcutaneous anakinra was initiated at 10 mg/kg daily with significant improvement in arthritis, rash, and fatigue. Labs after one month showed resolved anemia, normal inflammatory markers, and high IL-18 (7,824 pg/mL, normal 89-540). He switched to 4.29 mg/kg of canakinumab monthly. After one month, he had mildly active arthritis, occasional fatigue, and stable labs apart from an increase of IL-18 to 15,329 pg/mL. The mother, who is poorly controlled off therapy, also has elevated IL-18 (7,176 pg/mL). See Figures 2-4 for physical exam findings and Table 1 for a summary of symptoms and results.

Conclusion: We present a family cohort with juvenile-onset arthritis and rash, found to have elevated IL-18, VUS in both NLRC4 and IL2RA, and a chromosomal duplication consistent with a heritable autoinflammatory syndrome. While it appears that both variants are required for symptomatology, his presentation is most consistent with an unrecognized gain of function NLRC4 mutation despite lack of recurrent fevers or enterocolitis. Genetic evaluation led to targeted therapy and improved outcomes, with additional testing underway to further personalize therapy.

Background – The human thymus suffers a transient neonatal involution, recovers and then starts a process of decline between the 1st and 2nd years of life. Age-related morphological changes in thymus were extensively investigated, but the genomic mechanisms underlying this process remain largely unknown.

Methods – Through WGCNA and TF-miRNA-mRNA integrative analysis we studied the transcriptome of neonate and infant thymic tissues grouped by age: 0-30 days (A); 31days-6 months (B); 7-12 months (C); 13-18 months (D); 19-31months (E). Age-related transcriptional modules, hubs and high gene significance (HGS) genes were identified, as well as TF-miRNA-hub/HGS co-expression correlations.

Results – Three transcriptional modules were correlated with A and/or E groups. Hubs were mostly related to cellular/metabolic processes; few were differentially expressed (DE) or related to T-cell development. Inversely, HGS genes in groups A and E were mostly DE. In A (neonate) one third of the hyper-expressed HGS genes were related to T-cell development, against one-twentieth in E, what may correlate with the early neonatal depletion and recovery of thymic T-cell populations.

Consanguineous marriages in tribal cultures, such as that in the United Arab Emirates significantly increase the prevalence of autosomal recessive disorders. Premarital genetic screening and counseling, thus, are expected to reduce the frequency of these diseases.

In this pilot study, diagnostic exome sequencing was used in the premarital screening program to identify recessive pathologic variants preventable by premarital counseling. A total of 487 pathologic or likely pathologic variants were identified in 176 studied Emiratis (88 couples), averaging 2.8 variants per person. Four percent of the persons had negative diagnostic exome sequencing; the remaining had one to eight variants per person. Of the 351 distinct variants, 162 (46%) were novel. Twenty (23%) couples had pathologic or likely pathologic variants of inborn errors of immunity (IEI). Two couples (10%) had IEI pathologic or likely pathologic heterozygous variants in both partners imposing risk for autosomal recessive disease in the offspring. Other eighteen couples (90%) had pathologic/ likely pathologic heterozygous variants present in only one person of the couple. Total of sixteen (4.5%) IEI variant identified and eight (50%) were novel. Fourteen known phenotypic IEI diseases were recognized (table. 1). These preliminary results support a need for nationwide premarital genetic screening, and primary immunodeficiency registry to identify common and novel pathogenic variants with high heritability rate. These results will aid adopting a pre- and post-connectional reproductive carrier counseling to reduce autosomal recessive diseases. Also, it will assist the diagnosis of these complex diseases in our community.

C7D (610102)C7 (217070)NM_000587.3:c.1135G>C (p.Gly379Arg) - VCV000012108NM_000587.3:c.405delT (p.Asn136Thrfs) - VCV000432759ADA-SCID (102700)ADA (608958)NM_000022.3:c.226C>T (p.Arg76Trp) - VCV000001962NM_000022.3:c.454C>A (p.Leu152Met) - VCV000001979 IMD28 (614889)IFNGR2 (147569)

NBSLD (613078)RAD50 (604040)NM_005732.3:c.2165dupA (p.Glu723Glyfs) - VCV000141045Bolded variants were not found at https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/clinvar/ or HGMD® Professional 2019.2; MIM, Mendelian Inheritance in Man; VCV, Variation in ClinVar; rs, Reference SNP; IMD20, immunodeficiency 20; FCGR3A, Fc fragment of IgG, low affinity IIIa, receptor for; HIES2, hyper-IgE recurrent infection syndrome 2, autosomal recessive; DOCK8, dedicator of cytokinesis 8; CD8DF, CD8 deficiency, familial; CD8A, CD8 antigen, alpha polypeptide; C7D, complement component 7 deficiency; C7, complement component 7; ADA-SCID, severe combined immunodeficiency, autosomal recessive, T cell-negative, B cell-negative, NK cell-negative, due to adenosine deaminase deficiency; ADA, adenosine deaminase; IMD28, immunodeficiency 28; IFNGR2, interferon-gamma receptor 2; BLS-I, bare lymphocyte syndrome type I, TAP2, transporter, ATP-binding cassette, major histocompatibility complex, 2; GS2, Griscelli Syndrome, Type 2; RAB27A, RAS-associated protein RAB27A; ISDNA, immunoskeletal dysplasia with neurodevelopmental abnormalities; EXTL3, exostosin-like glycosyltransferase 3; CFDD, complement factor D deficiency; CFD, complement factor D; FCN3, ficolin 3; CDG1, granulomatous disease, chronic, autosomal recessive, cytochrome b-positive, type I; NCF1, neutrophil cytosolic factor 1; SCN7, neutropenia, severe congenital, 7, autosomal recessive; CSF3R, colony-stimulating factor 3 receptor, granulocyte; NBSLD, Nijmegen breakage syndrome-like disorder; RAD50, S. cerevisiae, homolog of; CDG1H, congenital disorder of glycosylation, type Ih; ALG8, ALG8, S. cerevisiae, homolog of.

Introduction: Common variable immune deficiency (CVID) is associated with an increased risk for development of several types of malignancies including lymphoid and gastrointestinal cancers. With improvement in overall survival and longevity in this patient population largely due to the effectiveness of immunoglobulin replacement therapy (IGRT) in reducing infections, cancer has now emerged as the one of the most significant life-threatening complications of CVID.

Methods: Data were analyzed from patients with a diagnosis of CVID (ICD-10 codes: D83.9, D83.1) that were enrolled in the IDEaL (Immunoglobulin, Diagnosis, Evaluation, and key Learnings) Patient Registry between 2010 and 2019. This is a prospective, longitudinal registry study of patients receiving IGRT in the home or ambulatory infusion suite with one national home infusion provider. Cancer occurrence and type, patient demographics and IGRT dosing information were obtained from medical charts and nursing and pharmacy standard of care forms.

Results: Out of 312 patients with CVID, 38 (12.2%) patients developed 41 cancers. The incidence of hematological malignancies was 6.1% (19 cases) and accounted for 46.3% of all reported cancers. There were 11 (26.8%; 11/41) cases of Non-Hodgkin’s Lymphoma (NHL), 7 (17.1%; 7/41) cases of Chronic Lymphocytic Leukemia (CLL), and 1 (2.4%; 1/41) case of multiple myeloma. Of the cases of NHL, 2 cases were identified as gastric mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue (MALT) lymphoma. The incidence of solid tumors was 7.1% (22 cases). These accounted for 53.7% of all reported cancers and were heterogeneous in localization. There were 7 (17.1%; 7/41) cases of skin tumors (3 melanomas, 2 basal cell carcinomas, and 2 in which cell type was not-specified). There were 4 (9.8%; 4/41) cases of breast cancer, 3 (7.3%; 3/41) cases of lung cancer, 2 (4.9; 2/41) cases of uterine cancer, 2 (4.9% 2/41) cases of prostate cancer, 2 pituitary tumors (4.9%; 2/41), 1 (2.4%; 1/41) bladder tumor, and 1 (2.4%; 1/41) adrenal carcinoma. Patients who developed cancer were mostly female: 24 (63.1%), and the median age at cancer diagnosis was 63 (range 21-75 years). The prevalence of all cancers in this Registry population was higher than the 5-year, all age, all cancers limited duration prevalence estimates in the US (1.5%). The median age at time of referral for home infusion of IGRT was 65 years of age. Of these patients, 55.3% were Ig naïve prior to starting service with this home infusion company. Most patients received subcutaneous Ig (71.1%) versus intravenous Ig (28.9%) at start of care with mean doses of 128.6±42.4 mg/kg/wk and 431.0±70 mg/kg/month respectively.

Conclusions: Over 12% of the study population suffered from a malignancy. These data point to defective immunosurveillance mechanisms in preventing certain cancers in patients with CVID. Better understanding the occurrence of malignancy in patients with CVID will help to postulate mechanisms between immune factors and cancer initiation and progression as well as appropriate screening and treatment patterns for this patient population including the role of IGRT.

DFSP is a rare low-grade cutaneous malignancy. A slowly progressive tumor that rarely metastasizes but frequently has broad subclinical extension and a high recurrence rate after excision. DFSP rare in children, but is very common in ADA-deficient SCID and all patients should have full dermatology screening at least annually. It was first identified in the ADA population in 2011 and is not seen in X- SCID or other PID. Protuberant lesions should be referred for Mohs micrographic surgery.

Introduction: Ataxia-telangiectasia (AT) is a rare disease of primary immunodeficiency and has a wide spectrum of immunologic abnormalities. We present a case of a patient born with low T-cell receptor excision circles (TRECs) with progressive combined immunodeficiency leading to the diagnosis of T-B-NK-SCID and treatment with bone marrow transplant, who later presented with L-dopa responsive dystonia and finally was diagnosed with AT after genetic testing was done in his grandmother that had breast cancer.

Case presentation: A full term male was born with low TRECs (44 copies/uL) on newborn screen within the first few months of screening in Illinois. He presented to clinic at 2 months of age, where he was found to have hypogammaglobulinemia and a predominant B cell deficiency with mildly reduced T cells. He was started on monthly IVIg and prophylactic antifungals while initiating his evaluation. B cell tyrosine kinase (BTK) was normal and T/B cell mitogen stimulation testing was normal. However, he had a steady decline in T and NK cell counts over months. Genetic testing that was available at that time included ADA, AK2, DCLRE1C, LIG4, NHEJ1, RAC2, RAG1, RAG2 which only revealed heterozygosity for the V186L variant of the DCLRE1C gene, which was also carried by his unaffected father and sister. Due to the persistent decline his CD3 counts to 147/uL and CD56/16 counts to 26/uL, at age 10 months he received a matched sibling bone marrow transplant conditioned with campath. He achieved complete immune reconstitution by 18 months after the transplant. He had normal development until age 2 when he presented with occasional falling after walking normally and was diagnosed with L-dopa responsive dystonia. His grandmother developed breast cancer, and because of a strong family history of breast cancer had genetic screening that revealed a mutation in ATM. At this point the patient was evaluated for AT and found to also be affected.

Discussion: The immunodeficiency in AT can have a wide variety of presentations involving humoral or cell-mediated deficiency or occasionally both. AT is known to present with increased NK cells and the immune defects are typically non-progressive in nature. This patient however had progressive immune deficiency necessitating transplant as well as reduction in NK cells. AT presenting as T-B-NK-SCID is atypical.

Conclusion: The immunologic defects in AT are exceedingly variable. This case suggests that AT may present with a picture similar to T-B-NK-SCID. Luckily, the majority of genetic screening programs have now incorporated ATM into their panels, so most patients will be captured, as opposed to early on in the era of TREC newborn screening. This case also highlights the importance of early consideration of AT in patients born with low TRECs, as syndromic manifestations, including dystonia, may present later in life.

Brenna LaBere, MD1, Maria Gutierrez, MD2, Hannah Wright, MSPH3, Elizabeth Garabedian, MSLS, RN4, Hans Ochs, MD5, Ramsay Fuleihan, MD6, Elizabeth Secord, MD7, Rebecca Marsh, MD8, Kathleen Sullivan, MD, PhD9, Charlotte Cunningham-Rundles, MD, PhD10, Luigi Notarangelo, MD, PhD11, Karin Chen, MD12

8Clinical Director, Primary Immune Deficiency Program/Department of Pediatrics, University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, Ohio; Division of Bone Marrow Transplantation and Immune Deficiency, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati, Ohio.

Background: Chronic granulomatous disease (CGD) is a primary immunodeficiency disorder caused by defects in the phagocytic NADPH oxidase complex, leading to increased susceptibility to infection and inflammatory or autoimmune disease. Up to 50% of patients have gastrointestinal (GI) involvement and meet diagnostic criteria for inflammatory bowel disease (CGD-IBD).

Methods: A retrospective evaluation of CGD cases from the USIDNET registry was completed. CGD-IBD was defined as the presence of any major physician-reported inflammatory, non-infectious GI tract disease manifestation, including Crohn disease, ulcerative colitis, IBD endoscopy findings, GI fistulas, GI strictures, GI obstruction, and proctitis. Demographic information, genotypes, symptoms and conditions, infections, antimicrobial therapies, immunomodulator use, and allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT) data were analyzed.

Results: 194 patients with a diagnosis of CGD were identified. 96 met criteria for IBD; 98 were categorized in the non-IBD group. Crohn disease and colitis were the most common GI disease manifestations in the CGD-IBD group (n=79), followed by GI fistulas (n=22). CGD-IBD patients had an increased average frequency of infections (10.6 events/patient) compared to the CGD-non-IBD group (5.1 events/patient). In both groups, lower respiratory tract infections were the most common infection type and Aspergillus was the most common organism. Enteric organism infections were more common in IBD patients. Temporal data regarding the timing of infections were not available. Immunomodulators, including biologics and interferon-gamma, were used at a significantly higher rate in IBD patients compared to non-IBD patients (80% versus 55%, p = 0.0003). The presence of IBD, as compared to no IBD, in a CGD patient increased the odds of immunomodulator use (OR = 3.168) (95% confidence limit 1.669-6.017, p = 0.0004). Patients who received immunomodulator treatment had a higher average number of infections as compared to those who did not. Thirty-one percent of all patients underwent HSCT; 8 patients died after undergoing HSCT, of which 4 had CGD-IBD. Of the entire CGD cohort, 17 patients died (8.8%), with a median age of death of 21.8 years (range 2.5-48.1 years), and with no significant difference between IBD and non-IBD patients (p=1.00).

Conclusions: Infectious events, enteric organism infections, and immunomodulator use were higher in IBD than non-IBD patients, though mortality was not increased. Patients with CGD and concurrent IBD are at increased risk for complications, supporting the importance of early recognition and diagnosis. Due to limitations in the available data, we are unable to conclude whether the increased number of infections in CGD-IBD patients was due to presence of IBD, or other factors such as age, use of immunomodulators, or transplant status. The USIDNET data may reflect more effective anti-staphylococcal prophylaxis and treatment in the current era, as compared to historical data. Our findings reinforce the frequent coexistence of IBD and CGD, illustrate major phenotypic features of CGD patients with GI inflammatory conditions, and highlight the need for further investigations.

Xiao-Fei KONG, MD, Ph.D1, Lisa Worley, n/a2, Darawan Rinchai, Ph.D3, Vincent Bondet, Ph.D4, Puthen Jithesh, Ph.D5, marie Goulet, MD6, Emilie Nonnotte, MD6, Nicolas Gürtler, MD7, Luyan Liu, Ph.D8, Mélanie Migaud, n/a9, Mohammed Elanbari, n/a10, Tanwir Habib, n/a10, Cindy Ma, PhD11, Jacinta Bustamante, MD, PhD12, Laurent Abel, MD, PhD13, Aimé Ravel, MD6, Stanislas Lyonnet, MD, PhD14, Darragh Duffy, PhD15, Damien Chaussabel, Ph.D16, Jean-Laurent Casanova, MD, PhD17, Stuart Tangye, PhD18, Stéphanie Boisson-Dupuis, PhD19, Anne Puel, PhD12

Down syndrome (DS) is characterized by the occurrence of three copies of human chromosome 21 (HSA21). These patients often develop chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis (CMC) and autoimmune thyroiditis, mimicking patients with heterozygous gain-of-function (GOF) STAT1 mutations, which enhance cellular responses to the three types of interferon (IFN). HSA21 contains a cluster of four interferon receptor (IFN-R) genes: IFNAR1, IFNAR2, IFNGR2 and IL10RB. A gene dosage effect at these four loci may contribute to the infectious and autoimmune manifestations observed in individuals with DS. We report high levels of IFN-αR1, IFN-αR2 and IFN-γR2 expression on the surface of monocytes and EBV-transformed-B (EBV-B) cells from DS patients. Levels of IFN-ɣR1, encoded by a gene on chromosome 6, were similar in the immune cells of DS patients and healthy controls. Total and phosphorylated STAT1 (STAT1 and pSTAT1) levels were constitutively high in unstimulated and IFN-α- and IFN-γ-stimulated monocytes from DS patients, although less so than those in patients with GOF STAT1 mutations. Following stimulation with IFN-α or -ɣ, but not with IL-6 or IL-21, pSTAT1 and IFN-ɣ activation factor (GAF) DNA binding activities were significantly higher in the EBV-B cells of DS patients than in controls, this response resembling the dysregulated responses observed in patients with STAT1 GOF mutations. Plasma type I IFNs concentrations were high in about 12% of the DS patients tested. A genome-wide transcriptomic analysis involving principle component analysis and a comparison of interferon modules was performed on circulating monocytes. It showed that IFN-stimulated genes (ISGs) were expressed more strongly in DS than in controls. DS monocytes have intermediate levels of IFN-α- and IFN-γ- induced ISGs relative to monocytes from healthy controls and from patients with GOF STAT1 mutations. By contrast to patients with GOF STAT1 mutations, circulating Th17 counts were normal and the proportion of terminally differentiated CD8+ T cells was high in DS patients. The constitutive upregulation of type I and type II IFN-R, at least in monocytes of DS patients, may therefore contribute to the autoimmune diseases observed in these individuals.

3Director, Division of Intramural Research; Chief, Immunopathogenesis Section/Laboratory of Clinical Immunology and Microbiology (LCIM), Division of Intramural Research (DIR), National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID), National Institutes of Health (NIH), Bethesda, MD, USA

Background: Warts are benign growths produced by human papilloma virus (HPV) that largely affect immunocompetent children and adolescences. Warts are common in the pediatric population due to their naïve immune system that has not yet mounted a protective response to HPV. Usually by their teenage years most are immune to the virus and warts have regressed. Though mechanism isn’t exactly known, evidence has shown cellular immunity specifically T-cells and Natural Killer (NK) cell cytotoxic response is essential for wart regression. Hence, patients with abundant, recurrent, and unmanageable warts should warrant further testing for possible underlying immune defect.

Case Presentation: 16-year-old Haitian male with 8-year history of multiple verrucous lesions on the oral mucosa and lips unresponsive to medical treatments (Acyclovir, Aldara and cimetidine) and laser therapy. He had no recurrent pneumonias, sinusitis, otitis media, meningitis, sepsis, deep-seated infections, abscess, recurrent or intermittent fevers, stomatitis, or autoimmunity. His mother had died of malignancy and is father and half siblings (paternal side) were alive and well. Physical exam revealed several verrucous lesions covering the entire lower lip and part of the upper lip, the tongue and soft palate. Smaller verrucous lesions noted on the fingers. No genital or anal warts. There was a dry, non-pruritic, mildly scaly, faint rash on the back and chest.

Oral lesions were biopsied and pathology showed epithelial hyperplasia consistent with HPV. Immune evaluation revealed the following results: CBC with diff relevant for leukopenia, neutropenia, lymphopenia and monocytopenia. Serum immunoglobulins were within normal. Lymphocyte subset showed B, NK, CD3+ and CD4+ lymphocytopenia. Lymphocyte antigen and mitogen proliferation studies significant for low PWM, ConA, Candida stimulation. He also had low functional antibodies to pneumococcal vaccine (4/23 protective). GATA2 deficiency was strongly suspected due to the presence of recurrent and intractable HPV + warts along with severe circulating monocytopenia, B-cell, NK-cell and CD4 lymphocytopenia. Genetic testing revealed a GATA2 heterozygous pathogenic variant c.1114G>A due to a missense mutation. Upon his diagnosis, NIH was contacted and he was enrolled in Dr. Steven Holland’s GATA-2 Clinical Trial.

Conclusions: We report a teenage Haitian boy with indolent HPV + warts and profound monocytopenia, B-cell, NK-cell and CD4-cell lymphocytopenia found to have a pathogenic variant on GATA2 exon 5, which reportedly has only been previously observed in five other individuals affected with GATA2 deficiency, all presenting at different age of onset with a wide spectrum of manifestations, phenotypes and outcomes. This demonstrates that even patient’s with same GATA2 mutation do not present with distinguishing features for a particular pathogenic variant. Our patient’s unique manifestation is just another step closer in unraveling the complex pathogenesis and diverse phenotypes found in GATA2 deficiency.

Introduction Screening for severe combined immunodeficiency (SCID) has been widely implemented as a part of the newborn screen. Testing is done by measuring T cell receptor excision circles (TRECs) which are DNA excision fragments that can be used as an indirect measure of naïve T cell production. The goal of this project was to evaluate all immunologic conditions identified in infants who have low TREC levels on newborn screen.

Results Forty nine neonates were identified with low TREC values. 46 (94%) of these infants had repeat TREC screening, 14 (29%) of which were found to have a positive second TREC screen. Lymphocyte subsets were evaluated in 23 of these infants and 5 of which were noted to have lymphopenia (defined as absolute lymphocyte count less than 2500). 2 infants were noted to have low CD4 levels (defined as < 300 cells/ul) and 6 were noted to have low CD8 levels (defined as less than 500 cells/ul). Of note, 50% of the infants with CD4 and CD8 lymphopenia had normal repeat TREC levels. 14 of the infants were noted to have low B cell levels (defined as < 610 cells/ul). 12 infants had quantitative immunoglobulin levels and of these two were noted to have IgG levels less than 100. Of note one infant was diagnosed with partial DiGeorge syndrome via microarray. In our study population, no infants were diagnosed with SCID.

Our study shows that testing for TREC levels on newborn screen may be beneficial in identifying not only SCID, but also other immunologic conditions. Infants in our study had evidence for both cell mediated and humoral immunodeficiency which necessitated further workup and follow up from Allergy and Immunology specialists. It may be beneficial to develop further programs to track infants identified with abnormal TREC levels on newborn screens to determine if they develop signs of immunodeficiency syndromes later in life.

The patient was transferred to our adult clinical immunology transition clinic for low IgG and IgA, elevated IgM and B cell lymphopenia, treated with subcutaneous gamma globulin. His medical history was relevant for recurrent respiratory infections since two years-old, failure to thrive and developmental delay. He also developed chronic auto-immune hemolytic anemia (AIHA) at ten years old, accompanied by prominent lymphoid hyperplasia.

Our initial evaluation at the age of twenty years old showed massive polyadenopathy and splenomegaly. Work-up confirmed flair-up of AIHA. At that point, the diagnosis of APDS was raised. He also had mild intellectual impairment and dysmorphic features such as a mild degree of ocular depression, deep-set eyes, vaguely triangular face, small chin, but had normal stature. A customized panel for usual genes involved in classic hyperIgM syndromes, APDS, Noonan and Kabuki syndromes came back negative. At 23 years old, an urgent coloscopy was performed because of acute abdominal pain and showed diffuse ileal lymphoid hyperplasia. Biopsies confirmed reactional lymphoid hyperplasia without infection nor malignancy. A second 232 genes NGS panel associated with PID identified a heterozygote mutation in TAP1; expression of HLA class 1 was normal on flow cytometry.

The patient was then started on sirolimus for an “APDS-like syndrome” despite the lack of genetic confirmation. Six months after introduction of mTOR inhibitor, his abdominal pain had completely disappeared. TEP scan showed complete resolution of axillar, retroperitoneal and inguinal lymph nodes and significant regression of splenomegaly. A third large non-biased 6700+ genes NGS panel revealed a 30 pb de novo deletion that included the splice site of PIK3R1 exon 11 typically involved in APDS2: c.1392_1425+4del p.(Asp464Glufs*5) , which was missed by the first two panels. Indeed, oligonucleotide-selective sequencing technology used for the previous panels was associated to mapping errors of short reads and difficult detection of large deletions. Interestingly, the patient also presented some but not all dysmorphic features of SHORT syndrome which is related to PIK3R1 haploinsufficiency.

Intro: Patients with Chronic Granulomatous Disease (CGD) are theorized to have a lower risk of malignancy related to their lack of free radical formation. There are relatively few reports of malignancy described in patients with CGD. We report three cases of malignancies in the large cohort CGD population at the National Institutes of Health followed between 1972-2018 to add to the seven cases described in the literature.

Case 1: A 48-year-old man with X-linked Chronic Granulomatous Disease with a history of severe inflammatory bowel disease, who presented with progressive left-sided chest pain in 2017, decreased appetite and weight loss. Transthoracic lung biopsy showed atypical cells and a PET/CT showed abnormally dense mesentery and widespread hypermetabolic abnormalities. A mesenteric biopsy showed metastatic pancreatic adenocarcinoma. Palliative care was initiated. Patient expired four months after diagnosis.

Case 2: A 24-year-old man with X-linked Chronic Granulomatous Disease and severe inflammatory bowel disease requiring total proctocolectomy and who had been remotely treated with infliximab, presented in 2015 with right upper quadrant pain. Abdominal ultrasound and MRI of the liver showed multiple liver lesions. Biopsy of these lesions revealed hepatocellular carcinoma. Patient underwent two courses of radiolabeled itrium spherules. However, his disease progressed and he expired approximately five months after diagnosis.

Case 3: An 18-year-old man with X-linked Chronic Granulomatous Disease and inflammatory bowel disease who presented in 2007 with fevers, abdominal pain and pancytopenia. During the course of his hospitalization, he developed sepsis which led to his demise. On autopsy, an incidental finding of papillary thyroid carcinoma was made.

Discussion: These three patients all had poorly controlled inflammatory bowel disease. Additionally, patients with CGD are typically exposed to higher doses of radiation, leading one to expect higher rates of radiation induced malignancies. However, there are still relatively few case reports of cancer in the CGD population. Tissue biopsy is necessary for diagnosis. Due to end organ damage secondary to the underlying disease in the first two cases, treatment options were limited. Managing infections during chemotherapy can be complex due to drug interactions with chemotherapeutic agents.

Myeloperoxidase (MPO) deficiency is the most common inherited defect of phagocytes that impairs microbial killing since the toxicity of the respiratory burst is dampened without myeloperoxidase release from the azurophilic granules. A significant portion of these patients remain asymptomatic, however there is a clinically variable phenotype that can present if they do become symptomatic. Fungal infections with Candida strains appear to be the most frequently reported. We present an adulthood case of recurrent invasive Candidal disease due autosomal recessive myeloperoxidase deficiency from a pathogenic missense variant in the MPO gene (c.1705C>T (p.Arg569Trp)).

A 23-year-old Caucasian male was in his normal state of health without any major illnesses until 18 years of age when he was diagnosed with Candida osteomyelitis of the heel, followed by Cryptococcal meningitis the following year which ultimately required a ventriculoperitoneal shunt. In 2019, he had a prolonged hospitalization after presenting with lethargy, headache and vomiting that culminated in seizure activity and prompted an emergency room visit. Imaging at the time showed ventriculomegaly, and fluid from the shunt revealed yeast, but no bacteria. He was started on broad spectrum antifungal therapy and admitted for further management. Cerebral spinal fluid and blood cultures confirmed invasive Candida albicans meningitis. During this hospitalization, he also developed sepsis secondary to Serratia marcescens. Because of the pathogens that were being isolated, our service was consulted. Of note, our patient does not have diabetes mellitus.

A neutrophil oxidative burst assay showed an absent respiratory burst compared to control. A primary immunodeficiency panel to identify genetic variants was also sent to Invitae. Variants in CYBA, CYBB, NCF2, and NCF4 were not identified, making chronic granulomatous disease less likely.

Peroxidase staining was negative on neutrophils and normal on eosinophils, suggesting a diagnosis of MPO deficiency. This led to MPO gene sequencing for deletion and duplication analysis. A homozygous pathogenic variant consistent with a molecular diagnosis of a MPO related condition was identified. Immunoblotting of patient-derived immune cells demonstrated an absence of mature enzyme. Although not typically indicated, given the severity of his presentation, our patient remains on Fluconazole for long term prophylaxis.

His younger brother also had a history of invasive disease with Candida – osteomyelitis and meningitis. A neutrophils oxidative burst assay showed similar results in his brother and similar results with peroxidase staining, also suggesting a diagnosis of MPO deficiency. Confirmatory genetic testing has not been performed yet. Their father, who reported severe skin infections with Candida, had peroxidase stains performed on neutrophils and eosinophils which were both normal.

Introduction: Juvenile xanthogranuloma (JXG) is an often benign, histiocytic proliferative disorder of the mononuclear phagocytic system. Patients typically present with localized cutaneous lesions. Systemic disease, especially central nervous system involvement, rarely occurs but has significant morbidity and mortality risk. No standard evaluation nor therapy regimen exists for systemic JXG and little is known about the genomic alterations underlying its pathology.

Case Report: A full-term male infant presented at 4 months of age with post-prandial abdominal pain, fevers, altered mental status and weight loss. Abdominal ultrasound and CT identified renal masses. A chest CT was obtained showing a paraspinal mass with possible neural foramina extension. MRI brain and total spine was consistent with diffuse leptomeningeal disease involving the left frontal convexity, brainstem, cerebellum, and multiple cranial nerves. Abnormal enhancement was also present along the entire surface of the spinal cord extending into the cauda equina with additional enlargement of the cervical/upper thoracic cord with intramedullary enhancing masses and a right paraspinal mass. Renal biopsy yielded a pathologic diagnosis of disseminated JXG. Integrative clinical sequencing of the mass identified a somatic driving ALK rearrangement (KIF5B-ALK in-frame fusion). Tumor and matched germline DNA sequencing did not detect any alterations in the RAS/MAPK pathway. Bone marrow biopsy was negative for disease with cerebrospinal fluid analysis showing numerous monocytes and macrophages consistent with JXG.

The patient was started on therapy consisting of systemic dexamethasone, intrathecal methotrexate/hydrocortisone and systemic intravenous cytarabine. His first cycle was complicated by Pseudomonas aeruginosa bacteremia and gangrenous cellulitis of the perianal region, treated with systemic/topical antibiotics and topical GM-CSF. Following completion of the initial cycle of therapy, the patient was noted to have declining neurologic status, including seizure-like activity. Repeat MR imaging revealed worsening CNS disease with new subdural fluid collection and progression of leptomeningeal enhancement and intramedullary cervical lesion. In light of disease progression, the decision was made to continue dexamethasone treatment, but add adjunct intrathecal cytarabine, and transition to targeted ALK inhibition via daily oral ceritinib, given its predicted CNS penetrance followed by ceritinib in combination with systemic intravenous clofarabine. Significant clinical and radiographic improvement was noted with the new targeted treatment regimen. Ceritinib therapy was tolerated well overall after a 25% dosing reduction made for initial grade 2 gastrointestinal toxicity and grade 4 hypertriglyceridemia (non-life threatening but level > 1000 mg/dL). Following continued treatment with daily ceritinib and completion of 12 cycles of clofarabine therapy, our patient experienced complete disease remission. He continues to do well on daily ceritinib monotherapy with plan to complete an additional year of therapy.

Conclusion: Our report highlights the potential benefit of real-time integrative clinical sequencing in the management of systemic histiocytic lesions, specifically non-Langerhans cell conditions. It has the potential to identify novel somatic genetic alterations, other than the typical LCH-associated BRAF mutations of the MAPK pathway, that may be therapeutically targetable. Treatment with 2nd generation ALK-inhibition in our pediatric disseminated JXG patient was a novel, biologically-rationale management approach with minimal toxicity and potentially contributed to his complete remission.

Background: C3 glomerulonephropathy (C3GN) is a progressive kidney disease with the predominant pathological feature of C3 deposits around the glomerular capillaries. C3GN patients suffer from dysregulated activation of the alternative pathway as the result of autoantibodies or congenital genetic defects that stabilize cleavage of C3. Despite therapy involving immunosuppression and complement-pathway inhibition, the prognosis for C3GN is poor. We report a patient with autoantibody-mediated, refractory C3GN who demonstrated no improvement on rituximab but achieved sustained remission on bortezomib. Follow up studies after one year demonstrated clearance of the culprit autoantibody, normalization of C3 levels, and improved pathologic appearance of the kidneys. This case supports the idea that C3GN is frequently driven by pathogenic autoantibodies that may not clear with rituximab alone. Plasma cell directed therapy has the potential to clear these autoantibodies and halt the progression of disease.

Case presentation: We report the case of a Hispanic male with chronic renal dysfunction initially diagnosed with membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis on renal biopsy at 12 years of age. Despite cellcept and prednisone, over the next 4 years, he had worsening proteinuria and an increase in protein-to-creatinine ratio. Renal biopsy suggested C3GN, and lab studies revealed a factor-H autoantibody and C3 level below the assay limit of detection. After initiating eculizumab, the proteinuria temporarily improved; however, the proteinuria eventually worsened, and he was referred to immunology.

We hypothesized that the factor H-binding autoantibody was the cause of dysregulated C3 cleavage and disease progression, and blocking the terminal complement pathway with eculizumab would not halt upstream C3-mediated kidney injury. At the age of 20, rituximab and plasmapheresis were administered to clear the factor-H autoantibody. Three months after rituximab administration, the factor-H autoantibody level decreased to the normal range, but he continued to have significant proteinuria with low serum albumin and undetectable C3 level. We concluded that the relevant autoantibody was not solely produced by differentiating memory B cells, so we decided to target the plasma cell compartment. Bortezomib was started at the age of 21, and eculizumab was continued given his initial response to treatment. After adding bortezomib, Factor H autoantibody levels dropped below prior levels and serum C3 level normalized. Renal biopsy at the age of 22 showed evidence of improving C3 deposition and less prominent glomerular hypercellularity, with stable mesangial hypercellularity, interstitial fibrosis, tubular atrophy, and sclerotic glomeruli. Although his proteinuria did not worsen, it remained persistent, suggesting that earlier introduction of bortezomib could have prevented disease advancement. There has been no further progression of kidney failure.

Conclusions: The majority of C3GN patients harbor autoantibodies to components of the alternative pathway of complement. This case provides evidence that at least some of these autoantibodies are indeed the cause of complement dysregulation, and thus are prime targets for therapy. B cell targeting therapies may be inadequate to decrease autoantibody levels for some patients. Early initiation of bortezomib, or other plasma-cell directed therapy, may effectively induce complement normalization and disease remission in these cases.

MECP2 Duplication Syndrome (MDS) is a rare, X-linked genetic disorder characterized by early hypotonia, profound intellectual disability, seizures, and immunodeficiency. Combined IgA and IgG subclass deficiencies were reported to be associated with this syndrome.

An 18-year-old male with autism, seizure disorder, infantile hypotonia, and asthma was referred to the immunology clinic for evaluation of recurrent respiratory tract infections (RTI’s) and methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) skin infections. He had poorly controlled asthma with multiple exacerbations despite treatment with high dose inhaled corticosteroid and a long-acting bronchodilator. He has no family history of immunodeficiencies or congenital disorders.

He had a poor response to polysaccharide pneumococcal vaccination. He was diagnosed with combined IgG2/IgG4 subclass/IgA deficiency and was started on immunoglobulin replacement therapy and prophylactic rotating antibiotic therapy. Thereafter, his clinical course markedly improved with a reduction in the frequency of RTI’s as well as the number of bronchiectasis exacerbations.

There was high suspicion for an underlying genetic disorder based on his constellation of neurodevelopment disorders and immunodeficiency. Cytogenetic evaluation with array comparative genomic hybridization(CGH) analysis showed duplication of Xq25 and Xq28 consistent with MDS.

Discussion: MDS is caused by duplications involving the MECP2 gene locus of the X chromosome at Xq28. It has a 100% penetration rate in males whereas females act as carriers and are usually unaffected. Rarely, cases of de novo mutations causing MDS have been reported. Chromosome microarray analysis is currently the best initial clinical test when MECP2 duplication syndrome is suspected. Management needs a multidisciplinary approach involving geneticists, neurologists, ophthalmologists, physical medicine and rehabilitation specialists, psychologists, gastroenterologists, and allergy and immunology specialists. Prophylactic treatment with IVIG and antibiotics has been the standard of care for immunodeficiency in these patients. Prognosis is guarded and most male patients die in the mid to late 20’s because of severe RTI’s secondary to immunodeficiency.

Conclusions: This case confirms the association of MDS with combined IgA and IgG subclass deficiencies. Clinicians should consider pursuing genetic evaluation for MDS in patients with neurodevelopmental disorders and immunodeficiency because the diagnosis of the syndrome can change the overall approach to management and expectations in prognosis.

Introduction: C3 nephritic factor is an autoantibody that binds to the alternative pathway C3 convertase (C3bBb). This results in unchecked overactivation of the alternative complement pathway, which can lead to renal disease, partial lipodystrophy, retina disease, and frequent infections. In this case, we present a patient with partial lipodystrophy and low C3, subsequently found to have C3 nephritic factor.

Case Description: A 5 year old female presented with a 19 month history of low C3 levels. She was diagnosed 21 months ago with post-streptococcal glomerulonephritis (PSGN) after presenting with hematuria and elevated ASO titers. She had C3 levels drawn 1-2 months after time of diagnosis and C3 level was low at 27 (normal range 81-157), which was consistent with PSGN. It was rechecked 3 months after time of diagnosis and was still low. She was referred to Rheumatology at this time and was found to have a positive ANA titer 1:160. Tests for lupus and anti-phospholipid syndrome were negative. C3 normalized to the low-normal range at 6 months after time of diagnosis to 81. Her pediatrician checked to make sure it remained normal around 17 months after initial diagnosis and C3 was low again at 22. C4 was normal at 26. She was referred to Immunology for further evaluation.

C3 level was rechecked and low at 26. C3 nephritic factor was elevated at 1.07 (normal range 0.00-0.26). Alternate pathway complement (AH50) was confirmed twice and was undetectable, < 10 (normal level greater or equal to 46). Total hemolytic complement (CH50) was low at 22 (normal level 42-95). Other complement levels were checked and C1q, C2, C4, C5, C6, C7, C8, and C9 complement were within normal range.

Discussion: The overactivation of the alternative complement pathway by C3 nephritic factor can result in various clinical manifestations, such as C3 glomerulopathy and acquired partial lipodystrophy in predominantly the face and the upper torso. The exact mechanism of how C3 nephritic factor is related to facial and upper body lipodystrophy is not known. One proposed mechanism is that adipocytes in the face and upper body produce more Factor D, which is a complement protein utilized by C3 nephritic factor. Overactivation of the alternative complement pathway on the adipocyte then leads to formation of the membrane attack complex, resulting in adipocyte lysis.

Eye disease, such as retinitis pigmentosa and macular degeneration can develop. C3 nephritic factor can also lead to more frequent infections and renal disease. Patients need to be closely monitored. If patients develop C3 glomerulopathy, they may need to be considered for immunomodulatory therapy, such as steroids and other immunosuppressants.

Morton Cowan, MD1, Jason Yu, PhD2, Janelle Facchino, PNP3, Shivali Chag, MS24, Carol Fraser-Browne, n/a5, Janelle Long-Boyle, PharmD, PhD6, Ukina Sanford, M.S.7, Misako Kawahara, n/a7, Jess Oh, CLS8, Suan Teoh, CLS9, Divya Punwani, PhD10, Jasmeen Dara, MD11, Christopher Dvorak, MD12, Lori Broderick, MD, PhD13, Diana Hu, MD14, Holly Miller, DO15, Aleksandra Petrovic, MD16, Harry Malech, MD17, R. Scott McIvor, PhD18, Jennifer Puck, MD19’

Background: Artemis-deficient SCID (ART-SCID) represents ~3% of all SCID, but occurs in 1/2000 births in Navajo and Apache Native Americans. Artemis protein, encoded by DCLRE1C, is essential for repairing DNA double-stranded breaks, including those generated during V(D)J recombination of antigen receptor genes as T and B cells develop. Artemis-deficiency causes not only T-B-NK+ SCID, but also increased sensitivity to alkylating drugs and radiation. ART-SCID is the most difficult SCID to treat with allogeneic hematopoietic cell transplantation (HCT) due to high rates of rejection and GVHD, incomplete immune reconstitution, and toxicity following intensive conditioning regimens. As an alternative, we developed a self-inactivating lentiviral vector containing the human Artemis promoter and DCLRE1C cDNA (AProArt). We are evaluating its toxicity and efficacy in a Phase I/II gene transfer trial in ART-SCID patients.

Methods: Newly diagnosed infants with ART-SCID and older patients with insufficient immunity despite prior allogeneic HCT were eligible if organ function was acceptable. Infants needed to have no matched sibling donor and be at least 2 months old at conditioning. CD34+ cells were isolated from bone marrow or cytokine-mobilized peripheral blood, cultured with cytokines, transduced x2 with AProArt, and cryopreserved. Patients received 2 daily doses of busulfan, targeted for a cumulative exposure (cAUC) of 20mg*hr/L, with infusion of thawed cells on the following day.

Results: We treated 5 newly diagnosed infants (ART001-3&007-8) with median age 2.6m (range 2.3-3.7) and 3 previously-treated patients (ART004-6) (5.5y, 12.7y and 20.9y), with a median follow-up of 9.6m (range 1.6-17.2). The mean (SD) Bu cAUC was 19.4±1.0 mg*hr/L. Patients received a median of 6.5x106 AProArt-transduced CD34+ cells/kg (range 3.9-12.4). The average vector copy number (VCN) and transduction efficiency in the marrow grafts exceeded those in the PBSC grafts: 2.1±1.0 copies/cell vs 0.83±0.1 (p=0.02) and 75±9% vs 59±4.6% (p=0.03), respectively. There were no serious busulfan side effects. All patients had transduced peripheral blood leukocytes by 4w and 7 of 8 developed gene marking in T, B, NK and myeloid cells by 8w (Fig. 1). Gene-corrected CD3, CD4, CD4/45RA/CCR7, CD8 and CD19 cells appeared in 7 of 8 patients (Fig. 2), with ART005 having T, NK and myeloid marking without B cells at 6m post infusion. Normalization of lymphocyte proliferation to PHA occurred in the 3 evaluable (>12w) infants (Fig. 3), all 3 now outpatients off isolation. Two infants and 1 previously treated child developed autoimmune hemolytic anemia (AIHA), with 2 requiring immunosuppressive therapy. Infections included rhinovirus at presentation in ART001 that resolved with T cell reconstitution. After discharge ART001 acquired and recovered from norovirus and ART002 acquired and recovered from CMV and rotavirus. Analyses of insertion sites and T cell receptor diversity are pending.

Conclusion: Infusion of AProArt-transduced autologous CD34 cells into ART-SCID patients pretreated with very low exposure busulfan resulted in multilineage engraftment of transduced cells with evidence for T and B cell immune development. AIHA, the only complication to date, occurred early and appears to resolve following restoration of T cell immunity. These encouraging results suggest potential effectiveness of ex vivo gene therapy for ART-SCID.

Background: Systemic lupus erythematosus is a heterogeneous disorder of the immune system. Systematic genetic evaluation of patients with childhood-onset SLE (cSLE) has begun to identify phenotypic clusters of cSLE patients with classic SLE-causing genetic variants, as well as revealed unexpected genetic mimics of lupus. We report 3 patients diagnosed with cSLE with similar typical and atypical lupus features, who were subsequently found to carry pathogenic NRAS variants that are the cause of RAS-associated autoimmune leukoproliferative disorder (RALD).

Cases: All 3 patients (2 females, 1 male) presented at < 3 years of age (average age 21.7 months, range 17-27 months) with anti-nuclear antibodies, anti-double-stranded DNA antibodies, autoimmune hemolytic anemia, severe thrombocytopenia, antiphospholipid antibodies, hypocomplementemia and nephritis. Additionally, the patients all displayed fevers, organomegaly, lymphadenopathy and hypergammaglobulinemia. Two out of 3 patients had a malar rash, leukopenia, lymphopenia, anti-Smith antibodies, serositis or arthritis. No patient had oral or nasal ulcers or photosensitivity. Despite the fevers, lymphoproliferation and systemic autoimmunity, the patients did not display overwhelming immune dysregulation (peak ferritin 128-623 ng/mL). Interestingly, the patients were found to have monocytosis (19-45%), as has previously been reported in RALD. Double negative T cells were within normal range in the 2 patients in which this was tested. All 3 patients required aggressive immune modulation for control of their disease manifestations. Two of the 3 developed severe infections, specifically pneumococcal sepsis, during therapy. Current follow-up covers an average of 9.2 years (range 0.6 to 17 years). The patients responded to corticosteroids and were given sequential trials of various steroid-sparing therapies. In general, they appeared to benefit from both B cell depletion and T cell-directed modalities (cyclosporine, rapamycin), which are not first line therapy in cSLE. Unfortunately, 1 patient developed a fatal pulmonary infection while on treatment; her underlying disease was felt to be quiescent. Due to the early-onset of disease, each patient was selected for genetic evaluation (2 by exome sequencing, 1 by gene panel). This lead to the discovery of pathogenic NRAS variants (c.38G>A, p.G13D) in all patients, assumed to be somatic, although this was confirmed in only 1 case.

Conclusion: RAS-associated autoimmune leukoproliferative disorder can present indistinguishable from cSLE with positive autoantibodies, immune cytopenias, arthritis, nephritis and hypocomplementemia. Clinicians should consider evaluating for RALD in cSLE patients who present at an early age ( < 3 years) with predominant features of lymphoproliferation and hematologic abnormalities, particularly monocytosis. T cell-directed therapy with cyclosporine or rapamycin should be considered for RALD.

Cytotoxic T Lymphocyte Associated Protein 4 (CTLA4) is a crucial downregulator of immune responses. (1) Human CTLA4 loss-of-function causes dysregulation of FoxP3+ regulatory T (Treg) cells, hyperactivation of effector T cells, and lymphocytic infiltration of target organs. Patients also exhibit progressive loss of circulating B cells, associated with an increase of predominantly autoreactive CD21(lo) B cells and accumulation of B cells in non-lymphoid organs. Inherited human CTLA4 loss-of-function demonstrates a critical quantitative role for CTLA4 in governing T and B lymphocyte homeostasis. (2) This case highlights the importance of Next Generation Sequencing (NGS) in diagnosing and managing complex presentations with multi-system involvement.

Case presentation: Patient was diagnosed with diffuse large B cell lymphoma at age 22 and treated with rituximab, cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine, and prednisone (R-CHOP) in 9/2012. He underwent autologous stem cell transplant with preparative carmustine, etoposide, cytarabine, and melphalan (BEAM) in 10/2012. He subsequently developed recurrent giant condyloma acuminata following transplantation requiring 9 surgical resections, refractory immune thrombocytopenic purpura (ITP) requiring aggressive systemic steroids and high dose IVIg at least yearly, experiencing hypogammaglobulinemia, recurrent sinopulmonary infections, disseminated herpes zoster, and Kaposi sarcoma.

In 6/2014, he underwent CT/PET, revealing extensive hypermetabolic lymphadenopathy and splenomegaly. Bone marrow biopsies were negative for lymphoma, although showed a slightly hypocellular marrow (40-60% cellularity), 2% blasts, and eosinophilia without peripheral eosinophilia. Repeated evaluations for HIV, syphilis, Histoplasma, CMV, HHV6, HHV8, Bartonella, Coxciella, Brucella, HTLV, toxoplasma were negative. HTLV1 and 2 antibodies had been negative prior to transplantation. Tonsillectomy 12/2015 due to progressive enlargement showed reactive follicular hyperplasia with focal acute tonsillitis without granulomas or viral inclusions. Repeated lymphocyte enumeration and proliferation studies were normal. A repeat PET scan 3/2016 revealed persistent diffuse lymphadenopathy involving the neck, chest, abdomen, and pelvis. Left lung biopsy revealed non-caseating granulomas without lymphoma. Stains for EBV were negative. Repeat PET scan 11/2016 indicated disease progression prompting a left axillary excisional lymph node biopsy, revealing EBV lymphadenitis with large, reactive follicles with interspersed inflammation and loosely formed granulomas and CD20 positive B cells within the follicles. EBV blood PCR was negative. AFB and fungal stains were negative on all biopsies. In 1/2017, his IgG was 615 (762-1488), IgA 33 (70-390), and IgM 58 (38-328) with only 1 out of 23 protective serotypes to pneumococcus post-vaccination at 1.3 or greater. In 3/2018, IgG was 380 (762-1488).

Custom NGS panel showed a heterozygous missense variant in CTLA4 c.534c>g (p.S178R) located in the transmembrane domain. This variant of uncertain significance is suspicious and strongly suggests the diagnosis of CTLA4 -related autoimmune lymphoproliferative syndrome . Patient was referred to the National Institute of Health, where he received a bone marrow transplant.

Primary immunodeficiency diseases comprise a group of highly heterogeneous immune system diseases and around 300 forms of PID have been described. NGS has recently become an increasingly used approach for gene identification and molecular diagnosis of human diseases guiding treatment to patients who may otherwise have poor outcomes. (3)

Introduction: Inherited defects of the complement system are rare disorders that can result in unique susceptibility to infections with select bacteria. Patients with a deficiency of a complement protein early in the complement pathway (affecting C1qrs, C2, C3, Factor H, or Factor I) have increased susceptibility to infection with encapsulated bacteria, most notably Streptococcus pneumoniae and Neisseria species. In contrast, patients with a deficiency of a complement protein at the terminal end of the complement pathway (affecting C5, C6, C7, C8 alpha/beta/gamma, or C9) almost universally present with severe, recurrent, or disseminated Neisseria species infections. Most genes encoding complement proteins are found on autosomes, in which specific complement deficiencies result from biallelic mutations. Although particular complement deficiencies occur at higher frequencies in certain populations, the prevalence of specific complement deficiencies is unknown in many parts of the world, especially in underdeveloped regions, including Sub-Saharan Africa. Herein, we describe a young Congolese boy with an atypical presentation of C8 alpha deficiency.

Case Description: A 17-month-old Congolese boy with consanguineous parents (first cousins) presented with recurrent infections. Prior to an evaluation of his immune system, he was hospitalized five times. His infections included episodes of acute otitis media, bacterial pneumonia, and viral pneumonitis. A bronchoscopy revealed diffusely edematous airways and growth of Candida albicans, Moraxella catarrhalis, and Streptococcus pneumoniae in bronchoalveolar lavage cultures. Concurrently, his respiratory PCR panel was positive for adenovirus. His initial immune evaluation included assessments of his serum immunoglobulin levels, vaccine titers (tetanus, diphtheria, Haemophilus influenzae, and Streptococcus pneumoniae), neutrophil oxidative burst, lymphocyte subsets, and CH50, in which only his CH50 was abnormal (16 U/mL). His CH50 remained low on repeat assessment (16 U/mL), at which time an AH50 was pursued and also returned with a low result (1% of normal). A complement system genetic panel identified a homozygous intronic variant in C8A (c.856-12G>A). Functional confirmation of the variant revealed that the patient had a significantly decreased C8 level (18 mcg/mL) and absent C8 function.

Discussion: We present a case of a young Congolese boy with C8 alpha deficiency and a clinical presentation atypical for defects in terminal complement proteins. Our patient presented primarily with recurrent respiratory infections, including Streptococcus pneumoniae pneumonia, but without a preceding history of meningococcal disease. While it is well established that patients presenting with terminal complement pathway defects have an increased susceptibility to meningococcal disease, it is less clear if they have increased susceptibility to pneumococcal infections. Occurring between exons 5 and 6, the homozygous intronic variant in C8A identified in our patient is predicted to result in abnormal splicing. While the allele frequency of this mutation is relatively high in the African population (0.017), functional confirmation of the variant demonstrated a decreased C8 level and absent C8 function that support the pathogenesis of the mutation. The discrepancy between the allele frequency and reported disease cases could be explained in part by varying clinical manifestations seen in C8 deficiency or underrecognized disease in Sub-Saharan Africa.

Rationale: SCID is a syndrome characterized by profound T, B, and (in some cases) NK cell defects that is universally fatal unless immune reconstitution is achieved. A total of 177 SCID infants have been given allogeneic bone marrow transplantation at Duke University Medical Center without pre-transplantation chemotherapy or post-transplantation graft-versus-host disease (GVHD); 90% received T cell-depleted haploidentical parental marrow and 47(26%) are known to be deceased. Post-transplantation follow-up ranged from 22 months to 37 years. The aim of this cross-sectional study is to characterize the clinical status of a large cohort of survivors treated at a single medical center.

Clinical status was assessed by detailed questionnaires delivered by mail or electronically. Adult (≥ 18 years old) and pediatric questionnaires were based on patients’ age. Patients were also contacted by telephone and evaluated at clinic visits. Molecular type of SCID, demographics, type, date and age at transplant were obtained from a clinical database.

Fifty questionnaires were completed to date from survivors ranging in age from 5 to 37 years. Twenty-nine/50 were adults ≥18 years at the time of the questionnaire. Genetic defects were known for all 50 patients- X-linked SCID was the cause in about half (Figure 1). Twenty-three of 50 patients were on immunoglobulin replacement. Thirty of 50 reported having received immunizations, and about half of those received live vaccines. Fifteen of 50 reported they were taking no regular medications; 11 reported taking prophylactic antibiotics.

>We found substantial scholastic achievement, with 17/29 adult patients reporting college attendance. Two had post graduate education including doctorate level degrees. Occupations included physician, nurse, factory worker, musician, teacher, and engineer. One patient had 3 children. Twenty-seven /29 adult patients shared their height and weight and 78% (21/27) had a healthy BMI (BMI 18.5-24.9), while 15% (4/27) were overweight, and 7% (2/27) were underweight (< 18.5). In pediatric patients, the average age and sex-adjusted BMI was at the 47th percentile and only 3 had a BMI that was < 5th percentile. Thirty-four/50 patients reported seeing an immunologist regularly. In the adult group, 38% reported no longer seeing an immunologist.

The health conditions reported were similar to those common in the general population, and included rashes, warts and mouth ulcers. Most reported these were transient, self-resolving issues. Thirteen of 50 (26%) reported having ADHD, higher than NIH reported rates which estimate ADHD in 8.1% of adults and 11% of children). Ten of 50 (20%) reported having anxiety, similar to the NIH reported prevalence of 19.1% in the general population. 34/50 (~68%) reported having no active concerns about their health.

Overall, our findings are consistent with those in the last update done by Railey et al, J. Peds. 155:834-840, 2009 in this population. Patients are doing well with most problems similar to those common in the general population. Most have a healthy BMI. ADHD had a higher prevalence than in the general population. More than 1/3 of SCID patients are not seeing an immunologist regularly, and a majority do not have any active concerns.

Rationale: Myopathy has been occasionally documented in patients with primary immunodeficiency (PID). However, data on frequency and patient characteristics associated with myopathy are lacking. We performed a descriptive analysis of patients with primary immunodeficiency (PID) in the USIDNET having myopathy as a feature of their primary disease.

Results: A total of 63 PID patients with myopathy were identified, 36 of which (57.1%) were female. Median age at onset of symptoms related to PID was 4 years (range 0.1-72 years, IQR 0.5-25 years). Median age of diagnosis of PID was 8.3 years (range 0.4-77 years, IQR 3-32.5 years). Age at onset of myopathic disorders was not known. Twenty-eight (44.4%) patients had a diagnosis of common variable immunodeficiency (CVID), 6 (9.5%) had agammaglobulinemia, 3 patients each (4.8%) were diagnosed with severe combined immunodeficiency, hypogammaglobulinemia, or ‘HLH and pigmentary disorders’, while 2 patients (3.2%)were reported in each category of combined immunodeficiency (CID), autoimmune lymphoproliferative syndrome (ALPS), and autoinflammatory disease. Thirty-five patients (55.6%) had a causative gene variant identified attributable to PID. The most common variant identified was BTK (6 patients) followed by AIRE, LYST, CYBB (3 patients each) and PI3KCD (2 patients). Eighteen individual patients had other variants identified (Figure 1). 15 patients had cellulitis or skin/subcutaneous tissue infection, 7 patients had a ‘skin or subcutaneous tissue abscess’, 2 had pyoderma gangrenosum, and 1 patient with eczema herpeticum. Within this cohort of 63 patients, the most common myopathy listed was myositis (18) followed by ‘muscle weakness’ (11), dermatomyositis (8), myalgia/s (6), myalgia/myositis (4), myopathy (4), polymyositis (2), steroid-induced myopathy (2). No patient had an infectious myositis or muscle abscess listed. Eighteen patients (28.6%) had a myopathic disorder at the time of diagnosis of their PID. Thirty-one patients (49.2%) received prednisone, 11 (17.5%) received hydrocortisone and 2 (3.2%) received dexamethasone. Two patients had a diagnosis of adrenal insufficiency. Nine patients (14.3%) underwent hematopoietic stem cell transplantation. Nine patients (14.3%) died; median age of death 16 years (range 0.4-40.6 years, IQR 3.6-21.1 years). ). One patient with chronic granulomatous disease had myopathy due to Duchenne muscular dystrophy, which was listed as a cause of death. No other myopathic disorders were listed as a cause of death for the other patients.

Conclusion: Myopathy and inflammatory myopathic disorders occur at relatively high frequency in PID, and may be present even at the onset of clinical symptoms. The underlying etiology can be speculated to be multifactorial. Further subgroup analysis is warranted to elucidate possible variant-specific or treatment-associated characteristics of myopathy in PID.

Figure 1 Frequency of monogenic variants identified from 35 patients with myopathy having gene data in the USIDNET PID registry. Each Individual patient in the ‘Other’ Category (n=18) had the following variants identified: RAG2, STAT1, PI3KR1, CLTA4, FOXP3, IKBKG, MAP3K14, UNG, ATM, DOCK8, PGM3, PNP, IL2RG, IL7RA, IRF2BP2, TNFRSF13B, TNFRSF1A, and MEFV (Figure 1).

Virus specific T cells (VST) have shown promising clinical efficacy in patients with viral infections after hematopoietic stem cell transplant. Despite being used to treat over 500 patients worldwide, critical quality attributes and parameters associated with successful VST products have not been established. Here we report in depth characterization and parameters established from a total of 81 VST products consisting of either trivirus (65 products targeting CMV, EBV, adenovirus) or hexavirus (16 products targeting CMV, EBV, adenovirus, HHV6, parainfluenza, BK virus) VSTs. We define a successful VST product as meeting release criteria (>70% viability, < 5.0 EU/kg endotoxin, 10 spots above background/100,000 cells). A median of 76 million (range: 26-404) peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) were isolated from a median of 54mL (range: 17-100) whole blood from 81 consenting donors. Clinical-grade VSTs were initiated using a median of 29 million (range: 8-80) PBMCs, stimulated with overlapping peptides derived from viral antigens (CMV (IE1 and pp65), EBV (LMP2 and EBNA1), Adv (Hexon and Penton) +/- HHV-6B (U54 and U90) +/-BKV (LgT and VP1) +/-HPIV3 (Matrix and NP)) at 200ng/μL/peptide, and cultured in G-Rex devices for 10-12 days. Clinically frozen cells yielded a median of 234 million cells (range: 35.5–780) with a median of 96% (80-100%) viability. 70% of triviral VST products targeted all 3 viruses by ELISPOT assay, 25% targeted 2, and 6% targeted 1. 19% of Hexaviral VST products targeted all 6 viruses, 31% targeted 5, 19% targeted 4 and 2, and 6% targeted 1 and 3. A median of 68% (range: 17-95%) were CD4+ T cells, 27% (83-4%) CD8+ T cells, and 0.4% (4-0%) CD16+CD56+CD3- NK cells. Sixty-five products met criteria for clinical release. To date, 38 patient-specific VST products have been infused, and 46 third-party VST infusions have been given from 19 products. In summary, VSTs were successfully manufactured from all donors, and all patient-specific products facilitated at least 1 dose, independent of donor white blood cell counts. Parameters associated with the highest expansion, specificity and in vivo potency are currently being evaluated.

Introduction: Bare lymphocyte syndrome (BLS) type II complementation group B is a combined immunodeficiency caused by biallelic mutations in RFXANK that result in the absence of major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class II proteins on the surface of leukocytes. MHC class II deficiency presents with vulnerability to infection, systemic autoimmune disease, and, specifically, refractory autoimmune cytopenias. We present a patient with BLS type II complementation group B whose autoimmune enteritis and refractory, life-threatening autoimmune hemolytic anemia (AIHA) were successfully treated with daratumumab (an anti-CD38 IgG1κ human monoclonal antibody).

Case Description: After immigrating to the United States, a young boy of Moroccan ancestry established care for episodic severe AIHA. His episodes were characterized by jaundice, fatigue, and pan-reactive autoantibodies, which required a combination of blood transfusions, corticosteroids, and mycophenolate mofetil to control. His family history revealed a sister with BLS type II complementation group B. Genetic testing confirmed that he too was homozygous for c.338-25_338del26 (752delG-25) in RFXANK – a founder event seen in North African populations and the most frequent mutation responsible for MHC class II deficiency. Additionally, a younger brother was confirmed to carry the homozygous mutation. Throughout puberty, his AIHA episodes increased in frequency and severity and were increasingly refractory to immunosuppressive therapy including high-dose corticosteroids, mycophenolate mofetil, sirolimus, rituximab, bortezomib, and high-dose intravenous immunoglobulin. Eventually, he required prolonged hospital admissions and daily blood transfusions, during which time he developed severe infections, including recurrent Salmonella enterica bacteremia, polymicrobial gastroenteritis, and recurrent herpes simplex virus-1 gingivostomatitis. Splenectomy was performed at 16 years of age, resulting in a 6-month clinical remission. However, transfusion-dependent AIHA returned in addition to autoimmune enteritis manifesting as diarrhea, malabsorption, and GI bleeding. As alternative management for AIHA, he was initiated on daratumumab. Following four weekly doses of daratumumab, his hemoglobin normalized and enteritis resolved.

Discussion: Autoimmune cytopenias are a frequently encountered manifestation of many primary immunodeficiency diseases, including MHC class II deficiency. Non-specific immunosuppressive agents may maintain stability of disease, but risk further susceptibility for infection. Furthermore, diseases may become refractory to typical treatment regimens. Here, we describe a patient with BLS type II complementation group B who presented atypically with moderate AIHA, only worsening to severe AIHA and autoimmune enteritis after puberty. In comparison, the patient's affected sister died from complications of infections and autoimmune disease in the first decade of life, and his younger brother underwent hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT) for similar complications at 3 years of age. Following a series of failed treatment regimens and without an adequate HSCT donor available, his AIHA responded to the anti-CD38 monoclonal antibody daratumumab (FDA-approved for treatment of multiple myeloma). Non-malignant plasma cells also express CD38, which has been the basis for using daratumumab to treat AIHA, particularly in severe cases post-HSCT. This is the first reported case of successful treatment of AIHA with daratumumab in a patient with MHC class II deficiency, suggesting it may be a reasonable treatment option in MHC class II deficiency patients and perhaps other primary immunodeficiency diseases with refractory AIHA.

Methods: The US Immunodeficiency Network (USIDNET) Registry was utilized to identify 784 patients with syndromic immunodeficiency. DiGeorge syndrome (64.2%) was the most prevalent, followed by hyper-IgE syndrome (13.4%), Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome (12%), ectodermal dysplasia with immunodeficiency (3.7%), ataxia telangiectasia (3.6%), undefined syndromic immunodeficiency (1%), Omenn syndrome (1%), CHARGE syndrome (0.7%), and dyskeratosis congenita (0.2%). As the focus of this study was to investigate rare forms of syndromic immunodeficiencies, data was analyzed excluding the well known example of DiGeorge syndrome.

Clinical characteristics: Out of the 281 patients with a diagnosis of syndromic immunodeficiency other than DiGeorge syndrome, 66% (n=185) were male and 34% (96) were female. The average age of disease onset was 1.9 years and average age of diagnosis was 5.8 years. Diagnostic delay was most prominent in Hyper IgE syndrome, where the age of onset was 2.9 years and age of diagnosis was 9.3 years. On the other hand, CHARGE syndrome was diagnosed at a mean age of 0.1 years.

Infectious complications and malignancy: A total of 1782 reported infectious conditions were sorted by organ system. Pulmonary infections were the most common (27%, n=478) followed by skin (26%, 470), ENT (21%, 381), gastrointestinal (8%, 147), systemic (8%, 145), genitourinary (2%, 42), CNS (2%, 33), oral (2%, 32), and musculoskeletal (2%, 30) infections. Pneumonia was the most commonly reported pulmonary infection (60%, n=285). Of all ENT infections, otitis media (44%, n = 167) was the most common, followed closely by sinusitis (42%, 160). A total of 943 infectious pathogens were recorded, of which 21% were Staphylococcus aureus (n=194), 13% Candida (123), 7% Pseudomonas (68), 6% Aspergillus (55), 5% common respiratory viruses (47), 4% other Staphylococcus (34), and 4% Streptococcus pneumoniae (34). Malignancy was diagnosed in 14% of patients (n=39), of which 51% (20) were lymphoma.

Therapy: Immunoglobulin replacement therapy was reported as done in 58% (n=162), not done in 35% (97), and was not reported in the rest of the cohort. Twenty-three percent of the cohort underwent stem cell transplant (n=66), with the highest rates in Omenn syndrome (7/7 patients, 100%) and the lowest rates in ataxia telangiectasia (0/27, 0%) and undefined syndromic immunodeficiency (0/8, 0%).

Conclusions: USIDNET provides a resource to describe the clinical characteristics of patients with rare forms of syndromic immunodeficiency. Data from the registry shows that these patients are susceptible to a wide variety of infectious conditions and pathogens. In this cohort, more than half received immunoglobulin replacement therapy and about a quarter received stem cell transplant. The overall diagnostic delay is about 4 years. This suggests the importance of immunological investigations in patients with congenital anomalies, syndromic features, or chromosomal aberrations who have recurrent infections.

INTRODUCTION: DOCK8 deficiency (autosomal recessive hyper IgE syndrome) may present with features of combined immune deficiency (CID) early in life. Here we report a premature male infant of 24 weeks gestation who had generalized skin candidiasis within 2 weeks after delivery -- the youngest patient with DOCK8 deficiency ever identified by genetic testing.

CASE HISTORY: The infant was admitted to the neonatal intensive care unit for extreme prematurity (birthweight 585 g, vaginal delivery), respiratory failure, and possible sepsis. He was the first born to non-consanguineous parents without a family history of immunodeficiency. The infant was placed on a ventilator and given antibiotics for possible sepsis. During the first 2 weeks, candida skin infection was diagnosed (with a positive KOH preparation) and treated successfully with topical nystatin. Herpes simplex virus PCR of the skin and blood cultures for bacteria and fungi were negative. Subsequently, the infant developed conditions commonly associated with prematurity, including anemia, hyperbilirubinemia, patent ductus arteriosus, cardiac instability, acute urinary tract infection, and bilateral grade I intraventricular hemorrhages. Weight and length trended at 3%. Occurrence of severe candida infection with scalded skin and intractable unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia prompted whole exome sequencing (collected on day 10; reported on day 30). Results showed two heterozygous pathogenic DOCK8 variants, compatible with autosomal recessive hyper IgE syndrome: c.1963C>T (p.Gln655*) and a ~33.39 kb DOCK8 deletion (exon 1 and intron 1). The mother carries the p.Gln655* variant. Testing for the ~33.39 kb deletion in parents is pending, to confirm biallelic DOCK8 variants in the infant. Immune laboratory studies included: normal newborn Trec screening; normal IgG at 12 weeks (76 mg/dL), and borderline low T and B cells at 5, 9, and 12 weeks (PMIDs 31220471, 27548364) with an increasing trend (CD4+ T cells: 944 -> 965-> 1581; CD8+ T cells: 396 -> 519 -> 737; B cells: 234 -> 878 -> 1358). CD4 phenotypes at 9 weeks (by another laboratory) showed normal distributions of various subtypes including naive, memory (central and effector), and regulatory T cells.

DISCUSSION: Diagnosis of DOCK8 deficiency so early in life presents a unique opportunity for anticipatory guidance and treatment. A report (25724123) on 64 patients (median age 10 years) described bacterial, viral, and fungal infections in 70-84% of patients, low IgG levels in 3%, low IgM levels in 62%, low CD4 and CD8 in 29%, and a mean IgE level of 5,201 IU/mL. The infant’s clinical course has been otherwise similar to courses seen for same gestational age infants. T and B cell counts were on the low side but followed an expected developmental pattern (27548364). Infection prevention with antibiotic prophylaxis (viral, fungal), IVIG, and immunizations (avoiding live viral vaccines) are needed to prevent early morbidity and improve the success of hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (30466772). Interferon-alpha 2b has shown efficacy against severe viral infections (24743019). The patient may be a strong candidate for HSCT, because a recent review reported a high survival rate, especially when done before 8 years of age (98% vs 78%; 30391550).

Background: Severe combined immunodeficiency (SCID) is an infantile-onset primary immunodeficiency in which there is dysfunction of T-cells, B-cells and NK cells. Although fatal without treatment, newborn screening test (NBS) has made it possible to detect SCID before affected infants experience severe opportunistic infections and complications. Currently, NBS is mandatory in all states of United States (US) including Puerto Rico (PR). Before implementation of the screening, a pilot program in 2011 identified one patient with SCID in PR that was successfully transplanted. After implementation of the mandatory test in August 2015, a total of 103,680 newborns in PR were screened with one case identified and confirmed in October 2019.

Results: The patient had a positive NBS result based on a Real Time PCR analysis for TREC. Two samples showed undetermined Ct values for TREC amplification indicating the absence of T cells. Reference gene amplified as expected. Initial immunology evaluation with lymphocyte subset panel was performed. Results showed the following: CD3: 4 cells/uL (2%), CD4: 1 (1%), CD8: 4 (2%), NK: 8 (4%), CD19: 167 (90%) and CD45RA was not reported. Patient laboratory results consistent with T -, B+, NK- SCID. Genetic PID panel was done. One pathogenic variant, c.670C>T (p.Arg224Trp) in IL2RG that is consistent with a diagnosis of X-linked SCID was identified. Another three genetics variants were found; c.1356+4C>T, in CARD14, c.3293T>C (p.Ile1098Thr), in DOCK2 and c.981C>G (p.Asp327Glu), in ZAP70. All of them with uncertain significance. CXR showed peri-bronchial thickening concerning for viral pneumonia. Patient was admitted to hospital, isolated and placed on empiric Cefepime treatment pending blood cultures and repeating images. He received IVIG and prophylactic doses of TMP/SMX, acyclovir, azithromycin and fluconazole. Repeat CXR was found to be clear. Cefepime was discontinued once blood cultures had been negative. During hospitalization patient developed one episode of bloody stools for which infectious workup was done. Changing in newborn formula resolved patient symptoms. Case was presented to transplant centers in US and options were broadly discussed with parents. Bone marrow transplant versus gene therapy were considered. Parents elected gene therapy at Saint Jude Children’s Hospital. At present, patient is pending transfer for gene therapy. With this confirmed case, we estimate an incidence in PR to be 1:100,000 from 2015 to 2019. Overall incidence is consistent with US and represents the first case in the last 4 years that was identified and confirmed in PR.

Conclusion: We identified one infant with abnormal TRECs that subsequently lead to the diagnosis of X-linked SCID. Mandatory implementation of NBS for SCID in PR provided the opportunity to successfully recognize, manage and define best treatment options for this patient. Early detection creates the opportunity to provide immune reconstitution with better outcome while infants are healthy and uninfected.

Luigi Notarangelo, MD, PhD1, Jan Verheijen, PhD2, Sunnie Wong, MD, PhD3, Jared Rowe, MD, PhD4, Kimiyo Raymond, MD, PhD5, Jennifer Stoddard, BS, MLS6, Ottavia Delmonte, MD, PhD7, Marita Bosticardo, PhD8, Kerry Dobbs, BS9, Julie Niemela, MS, MLS10, Enrica Calzoni, MD11, Sung-Yun Pai, MD12, Uimook Choi, PhD13, Yasuhiro Yamazaki, MD, PhD14, Anne Marie Comeau, PhD15, Erin Janssen, MD, PhD16, Lauren Henderson, MD, MMSc17, Melissa Hazen, MD18, Gerard Berry, MD19, Sergio Rosenzweig, MD, PhD20, Hasan Aldhekri, MD21, Miao He, PhD22

Congenital disorders of glycosylation (CDGs) are genetic disorders characterized by heterogeneous clinical features, often including immune dysregulation. Here, we present the first case of autosomal recessive deficiency of the mannosidase gene MAN2B2, manifesting as syndromic combined immune deficiency with immune dysregulation.

A female child born to consanguineous parents, suffered from recurrent pneumonias, thrush, small vessel vasculitis and arthritis since early in infancy. At 16 months of life, she had a thrombotic stroke and left hemiparesis. Psychomotor developmental delay was noted. She continued to have recurrent flares of vasculitis and arthritis, multiple respiratory infections that required intubation, and chronic diarrhea requiring total parenteral nutrition. Physical exam revealed microcephaly, low height and weight, strabismus, beaked nose, hyper-extensible skin, pectus carinatum, and mild hepatomegaly. She had significant speech delay and was only able to walk with support.

Laboratory studies at 4 years revealed normal IgG/IgA/IgM but markedly elevated serum IgE (42,550 kU/L), anemia (Hb 8.7 g/dL), thrombocytopenia (78 x109/L) and lymphopenia (520 cells/L), with low T and B cell counts, very low proportion of naïve T cells, skewed repertoire of CD8+ T cells, undetectable TREC levels, and impaired T cell proliferation to mitogens and antigens. There was an elevated percentage of circulating plasmablasts (7.4%) and of dysreactive CD21low CD38low B cells (53.8%). At the age of 5, HSCT with reduced intensity conditioning was performed from her phenotypically HLA-matched father, with improvement of T and B cell count and function.

Whole exome sequencing (WES) identified a homozygous missense variant in the Mannosidase alpha class 2B member 2 (MAN2B2) gene (p.Asp38Asn), that segregates with disease in the pedigree. The MAN2B2 Asp38 residue is evolutionary conserved. The p.Asp38Asn allele has a minor allele frequency of 0.0002687 in gnomAD, with no homozygotes. The CADD score for this variant is 28.300, significantly higher than the Mutation Significance Cutoff score (3.313).

Serum N-glycan profiling revealed elevated Man5/Man6 and Man5/Man9 in the patient. N-linked and free glycan profiling by mass spectrometry (MS) showed accumulation of Man2GlcNac2, Man2GlcNac1 and Man3GlcNAc1glycans in patient fibroblasts as compared to control cells, consistent with defective lysosomal glycoprotein degradation.

Lentiviral transduction of wild-type MAN2B2 into patient fibroblasts led to normalization of the N-linked glycan profile, with reduction of Man2GlcNac2 from 8.4 to 0.9 times control levels, and of Man2GlcNac1 from 26.9 to 1.5 control levels, indicating rescue of the impaired deglycosylation (Figure 1A).

Western-blotting demonstrated defective N-glycosylation of LAMP2 and ICAM1 proteins in patient fibroblasts (Figure 1B), which were corrected upon lentiviral transduction of wild-type MAN2B2 (Figure 1C). Overall, our results indicate that loss of MAN2B2 enzymatic activity leads to dysregulation of deglycosylation and abnormal mannosylation of glycans.

Heme oxygenase-1 (HMOX1) is a rate-limiting enzyme that catalyzes the degradation of heme to carbon monoxide, ferrous iron, and biliverdin, which becomes bilirubin. These byproducts are implicated in inflammation, cell homeostasis, and antioxidant defense(1). HMOX1-deficiency is an extremely rare autosomal recessive disorder with a complex presentation of a wide spectrum of symptoms, including hemolytic anemia and hyperinflammation, requiring genetic testing for confirmed diagnosis(2). We report the fifth known case of HMOX1-deficiency(3-5), a boy who presented at 4 years of age with aspects of the characteristic phenotype, but also had early onset asplenia, interstitial lung disease, and previously undocumented immune deficiency.

Patient’s presentation was notable for hyperinflammatory exacerbations triggered by viral and bacterial infections as well as vaccinations. Episodic flares occurred every few months lasting weeks to months with fevers of 102-104F, hypoxia, leukocytosis above 40,000/mm3, hemolytic anemia with negative Coombs, thrombocytosis exceeding 1 million/mm3, transaminitis, hemoglobinuria, hyperferritinemia to 4,000ng/mL, and elevated LDH to 28,000IU/L.

Immune evaluation revealed normal immunoglobulin levels and adequate vaccine titers to both protein and carbohydrate antigens. Although class switched populations were normal, B-cell phenotyping showed absent immature and transitional B-cells, low mature memory, and reduced CD27+ memory B-cells at 6% (normal >8%). Mitogen stimulation with phytohemagglutinin and anti-CD3 were decreased (24.7% of control and 21.5% of control, respectively). T-cell phenotyping demonstrated CD4 population heavily skewed to immaturity with 65% of cells with naïve phenotype CD45RA+CD27+CCR7+. There were few effector-memory T cells and the CD8 population was skewed towards immaturity with >65% of the cells naïve.

Liver biopsy was performed secondary to hepatomegaly yielding mild to moderate sinusoidal fibrosis. Bone marrow biopsy revealed a normocellular marrow with 3% blasts, increased megakaryocytes, and extensive hemophagocytosis. Natural killer cell function was very low, while soluble IL-2Ra level was normal. Further workup for hemoglobinopathies, metabolic defects, congenital disorders of glycosylation, lysosomal storage disorders, Wilson’s disease, autoimmune hepatitis, inherited and autoimmune hypercoagulability disorders, connective tissue disorders, myositis, and myopathies were all unremarkable. Imaging demonstrated asplenia and Howell-Jolly bodies were present. Hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (HLH) genetic testing showed no variants.

He was suspected to have systemic juvenile idiopathic arthritis (SoJIA) with episodes of macrophage activation syndrome. The frequency of his autoinflammatory flares increased such that he was corticosteroid dependent by age 9, having failed methotrexate, azathioprine, and anakinra. He was started on tocilizumab with laboratory improvements, but his lung disease progressed and became oxygen dependent. Lung biopsy confirmed nonspecific interstitial pneumonitis (NSIP) with cholesterol granulomas also seen in SoJIA. Ultimately, chronic lung disease led to his death at age 10. Whole exome sequencing yielded a paternal frame shift HMOX1 and maternal splice donor HMOX1 resulting in absence of protein. Bone marrow transplantation (BMT) in HMOX1 deficient mice have rectified phagocytotic defects and thereby their autoinflammatory phenotype, but no human reports for BMT treatment of HMOX1-deficiency has been described. Here we describe a phenotype expansion for HMOX1-deficiency to include not only asplenia and hepatomegaly, but also interstitial lung disease with cholesterol granulomas and inflammatory flares.

Introduction: Mutations in the gene encoding signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 (STAT3) cause autosomal dominant hyperimmunoglobulin E syndrome (AD-HIES) characterized by recurrent skin and sinopulmonary infections, atopic dermatitis, and elevated serum immunoglobulin E (IgE) levels. Treatment is largely aimed at controlling symptoms and preventing infections with no standard of care. There is a paucity of literature describing the utilization of biologic therapies in the AD-HIES patient population. We present 3 patients from one family with AD-HIES successfully treated with monoclonal antibody therapies targeted at Il-5, Il-4 and Il-13.

Patient 1: 13-year-old female with STAT3 LOF c.1003C>T (p.Arg335Trp) with a history of atopic dermatitis and asthma requiring 2-5 steroid courses per year with frequent school absences. She developed a severe pruritic rash covering her upper body 18 months ago that failed to respond to antihistamines and topical antibiotics prescribed by her primary care provider. Given her poorly controlled asthma and our concern for a follicular type morphologic variant of atopic dermatitis, dupilumab was initiated. Her scoring atopic dermatitis (SCORAD) prior to initiation of biologic therapy was 53.8 and improved to 4.5 following 12 doses (24 weeks) of dupilumab with clear dramatic improvement in her skin and quality of life (Figure 1). She also reports decreased asthma severity with no steroid courses, reduced albuterol usage, and significant decline in school absences since initiation of dupilumab.

Patient 2: 17-year-old female with STAT3 LOF c.1003C>T (p.Arg335Trp) who is the sister of Patient 1. She has a history of severe asthma requiring frequent emergency department visits, hospitalizations, and 4-5 steroid courses per year despite therapy with high-dose fluticasone-salmeterol. Spirometry prior to April 2017 demonstrated an obstructive pattern with an FEV1 ranging from 51-64%. She was initiated on mepolizumab in April 2017. Subsequent spirometry demonstrates an FEV1 average of 115% with a range of 96-126%. She had one hospitalization in early 2018 but otherwise no hospitalizations for asthma since initiation of biologic therapy.

Patient 3: 15-year-old female with STAT3 LOF c.1003C>T (p.Arg335Trp) who is the paternal first cousin of Patients 1&2. She has a history of severe atopic dermatitis with associated pruritus and picking behaviors, poorly controlled despite daily triamcinolone application. She previously failed ultraviolet therapy and crisaborole. She also has a history of severe asthma requiring 2-5 steroid courses per year despite high-dose fluticasone-salmeterol. Dupilumab was started in May 2019. SCORAD prior to initiation monoclonal antibody therapy was 80.3 and declined to 21.2 following 13 weeks (7 doses) of dupilumab therapy with marked improvement in skin appearance and pruritus (Figure 2).

We present three cases of AD-HIES caused by STAT3 loss-of-function mutations treated successfully with monoclonal antibody therapies targeted at Il-5 or Il-4 and Il-13. To the best of our knowledge, there is no published data describing the use of these biologic agents in the treatment of AD-HIES. Future studies are needed to clarify the role of these cytokines in the pathogenesis of AD-HIES and to elucidate clinical indications for biologic therapy in this patient population.

CTLA-4 is a potent inhibitor of T cell proliferation that competes with costimulatory receptor CD28 for its ligands CD80 and CD86 expressed on antigen presenting cells. Heterozygous loss-of-function mutations in CTLA-4 have been identified in patients with lymphocytic infiltration of multiple nonlymphoid organs (Lo et al).

The patient is a 2-year-old Jordanian male born at term to nonconsanguineous parents, hospitalized at 1 mo for LLL pneumonia, and at 2 mo and at 4 mo he was evaluated in the ED and diagnosed with non RSV-bronchiolitis with LLL infiltrate thought to be secondary to atelectasis. At 2 yo he developed LLL pneumonia and respiratory failure requiring PICU admission. He was treated with ceftriaxone. After discharge, he had 6 weeks of intermittent fever, progressive fatigue, productive cough, and FTT. He received courses of cefdinir, clindamycin, and TMP-SMX without improvement. Chest CT revealed left lung consolidation, LLL bronchiectasis, LUL tree in bud opacities, and hilar lymphadenopathy. Bronchoscopy with BAL revealed no bacterial growth and no acid-fast bacilli. 16srRNA NGS was positive for H. influenzae. Lung biopsy demonstrated acute and chronic bronchiolitis with bronchiolitis obliterans and intraluminal polyps, with lymphocytic infiltration involving the bronchi and bronchioles. The lung parenchyma showed airspace filling with foamy macrophages and chronic interstitial inflammation. Acid fast and fungal stains were negative. He was treated with systemic steroids for bronchiolitis obliterans with noted improvement. The severity of lung disease at such an early age prompted an immune evaluation. Sweat test, ANCA, anti-PR3 and HIV were negative. Total immunoglobulins were normal for age, and titers to S. pneumoniae, diphtheria and tetanus were protective. Lymphocyte enumeration revealed elevated T and NK cell numbers for age. Lymphocyte proliferation to PHA, PWM, Candida and tetanus were normal. Dihydrorhodamine assay was normal. B cell phenotyping was normal. There was normal expression of CD69, HLA-DR and CD25 on activated T cells; of note the patient was on systemic steroids when tested. Invitae 207 gene PIDD panel revealed a variant in CTLA4: c.326G>A (p.Gly109Glu) that has been shown to be pathogenic in one patient (Schawb et al). Flow cytometry showed normal frequency of T follicular helper cells and T regulatory cells compared with controls, however CTLA-4 expression by T regulatory cells was lower than control. Due to the severe and progressive nature of the patient’s lung disease, therapy with 3x weekly azithromycin and Abatacept 50mg SQ weekly was initiated.

We report a case of CTLA-4 haploinsufficiency presenting with recurrent pneumonia and bronchiolitis obliterans in a 2-year-old child. Based on patient registry data, our patient appears to be the youngest child diagnosed with CTLA-4 haploinsufficiency reported in the literature to date (Schawb et al). Notably, our patient lacks other features commonly described in CTLA-4 haploinsufficiency, including autoimmune cytopenias, gastrointestinal disease, lymphoproliferation, and hypogammaglobulinemia. This case illustrates the importance of consideration of this diagnosis in young children with severe lung disease without other evidence of immune dysregulation. Our hope is that prompt recognition and early treatment administration will prevent disease progression and further decrease in pulmonary function.

GATA 2 is a zinc finger transcription factor essential for development, hematopoiesis, and lymphatic angiogenesis. Heterozygous mutations cause haploinsufficiency due to protein dysfunction or reduced transcription. Clinical phenotypes of GATA2 deficiency are highly variable; common phenotypes include MonoMac, dendritic cell, monocyte, B and NK lymphoid (DCML) deficiency, familial AML, and Emberger syndrome. We report a new variable presentation of the DCML phenotype.

Case: A 55-year-old male with a history of warts as a child was in good health until age 32, when incidental bloodwork revealed severe thrombocytopenia. Bone marrow biopsy demonstrated sea-blue histiocytosis with negative workup for Niemann-Pick Disease. He underwent splenectomy with pathology showing EBV-associated lymphoid hyperplasia. Despite vaccinations prior to splenectomy, he had an episode of pneumococcal meningitis at age 35, and sepsis of unknown origin at age 55. Over the past several years he has developed chronic tinea corporis, onychomycosis, and otitis externa infections despite numerous antimicrobial regimens.

At age 47, the patient developed urinary retention, walking, and balance difficulties. He was found to have diffuse white matter changes on MRI, elevated WBC, and positive oligoclonal bands. Initially, he was diagnosed as progressive MS treated with steroids with partial improvement. CSF microbiology studies including AFB stains, bacterial, fungal, mycobacterial cultures, cryptococcal antigen, VDRL, T. pallidum particle agglutination (TPPA), as well as, PCR for CMV, EBV, VZV, Enterovirus, HSV 1-2, JC virus and T. pallidum were all negative. Peripheral blood studies included mycobacterial blood culture, PCR for CMV, EBV, HHV-6, in addition to serology for cryptococcal antigen, and Coccidioides species, all of which were negative. Additional neurological complications include granulomatous uveitis and oscillopsia, which he developed around age 47.

Immune evaluation performed at age 51 revealed low IgG2 and IgM, and the patient was started on 30 grams of monthly IVIG. CBC with differential was notable for normal monocyte count and thrombocytopenia, mild neutropenia (Table1). Immunophenotyping revealed absent B cells and NK cells, while the CD8 T cells were elevated. CD4 T cells were normal (Table 1).

At age 55, whole-exome sequencing identified a heterozygous missense mutation in GATA2 c.1186C>T, p.(Arg396Trp). After the diagnosis of GATA2 haploinsufficiency, he was found to have Myelodysplastic Syndrome with multilineage dysplasia (MDS-MLD) on bone marrow biopsy. He is currently awaiting bone marrow transplant

Discussion: We present a 55-year-old male with cytopenias, splenomegaly, leukoencephalomyelopathy, granulomatous uveitis, and recurrent fungal infections found to have a pathogenic heterozygous missense mutation in GATA 2. Leukoencephalomyelopathy in GATA 2 haploinsufficiency has been associated with JC virus and EBV infection. Our patient did not have any evidence of a chronic CSF infection. To our knowledge, myelopathies have not been reported with GATA2 c.1186C>T, p.(Arg396Trp). This case highlights the variable nature of presentation in GATA 2 haploinsufficiency, and the need for clinical awareness of this entity in order to facilitate early diagnosis and appropriate therapy.Complete Blood CountFlow cytometryImmunoglobulins*White blood cells 4.3 x10*9 /L (N: 4-11)CD3 2.40 x10*9 /L (N: 0.65-2.09)IgG 17.20 g/L (7-16)Hemoglobin 141 g/L (N: 135-170)CD4 0.48x10*9 /L (N: 0.41-1.33)IgA 0.92 g/L (0.7-4)Platelets 117 x10*9 /L (N:150-400)CD8 1.85 x10*9 /L (N: 0.20-0.78)IgM <0.20 g/L (0.4-2.30)Neutrophils 1.4 x10*9 /L (N: 2-8)CD56 <0.01 x10*9 /L (N: 0.08-0.75)Monocytes 0.4x10*9 /L (N: 0.2-1)CD19 <0.01 x10*9 /L (N: 0.07-0.50)

Background: In 2013 the PASLI disease (p110 δ activating mutation causing senescent T cells, lymphadenopathy, and immunodeficiency) also known as Activated phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K) delta syndrome (APDS) was discovered as a combined immunodeficiency.

Case Description: A 20 y.o. male with panhypopituitarism, history of autoimmune hemolytic with splenectomy, and PASLI (PIK3CD or APDS1) immunodeficiency presented to our Emergency Department with a three-week complaint of right leg weakness. He also had three -weeks of constipation and urinary retention.

Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) of the brain and spine showed numerous enhancing parenchymal nodules (figure one). Brain or spinal biopsy was requested, but not recommended by our Neurosurgery service. Lumbar puncture evaluation was performed. Cerebral spinal fluid showed no bacterial or fungal elements. Both quantiferon gold for tuberculosis and three consecutive sputum cultures for acid fast bacilli were negative. He continued his Sirolimus and the intravenous immunoglobulin replacement was increased to two grams/kg. The patient was cleared from respiratory isolation and discharged after two weeks in our facility with mild improvement in his neurologic status.

Within five days he was sent to a nationally renowned hospital. At this facility, extensive evaluation for his neurologic deficits were performed including culture and PCR for bacteria, virus, mycobacteria from CSF bone marrow, lymph node, blood, and induced sputum. These were noncontributory. He was given high dose corticosteroids for two days. One of our facility’s sputum cultures was reported with acid fast bacilli. But sputum mycobacterium tuberculosis PCR was negative. Repeat MRI scans of the brain and spine showed improvement (figure 2), so no brain biopsy was performed.

He was sent back to our facility with the recommendation to start a targeted PI3Kinase inhibitor on compassionate grounds as he was not eligible for the clinical trial because his weight was less than 45 kg. But pretreatment abdominal CT revealed multiple low-density lesions scattered throughout the liver (figure 3) not previously seen on prior noncontrast CT four months prior.

Background: Autoimmune Lymphoproliferative Syndrome (ALPS) is a rare heritable disorder of lymphocyte apoptosis. The majority of patients with ALPS have mutations in the tumor necrosis receptor family 6 gene (FAS) and these mutations are typically located within the intracellular death domain. Less frequently, FAS mutations outside of the death domain result in reduced lymphocyte apoptosis and ALPS phenotype. Mucosa-Associated Lymphoid Tissue (MALT) Lymphoma is a B-cell neoplasm, a type of indolent non-Hodgkin lymphoma. While patients with ALPS are recognized to have increased risk of various lymphomas, to date, no association has been reported in the literature with ALPS and MALT Lymphoma. MALT Lymphoma etiology lies in accumulation of lymphoid tissue in non-traditional sites, typically secondary to underlying inflammatory stimulus. It has been reported in patients with chronic infection or autoimmune disorders.

Results: The patient is a 24-year-old male diagnosed with ALPS clinically at age 8 years. He presented with inguinal and cervical lymphadenopathy, hepatosplenomegaly, and hemolytic anemia, and was found to have 10.7% double-negative T cells. He originally had increased total immunoglobulin levels, but from age 16 developed undetectable IgG and IgA, with elevated IgM. His mother had ALPS phenotype and hypogammaglobulinemia, and brother has ALPS phenotype with elevated immunoglobulins. Father and another brother are unaffected. At age 22, the patient was hospitalized following a splenic laceration in hockey. PET imaging showed subcarinal, mediastinal, retroperitoneal lymphadenopathy, splenic enlargement to 23cm and bilateral lung nodules (Figure 1). Excisional biopsies of left axillary and left lower lobe of lung were performed and showed low-grade B-cell Lymphoma (Mucosal) and underlying lymphoproliferative disease.

Invitae ALPS and CVID panels (37 genes) revealed a heterozygous variant of unknown significance in exon 3 of FAS (c.323A>G(p.Asp108Gly) Unlike most FAS mutations causing ALPS, this mutation is in the extracellular region rather than the death domain2. The c.323A>G variant has been reported in a single patient with ALPS phenotype, affecting FAS protein function by inhibiting binding to FAS ligand (FAS-L), reducing FAS-L induced apoptosis2. This FAS c.323A>G mutation was found in ALPS affected brother and was absent in the unaffected father. The patient’s mother passed away prior to testing.

Since diagnosis, the patient’s MALT Lymphoma has been treated with rituximab weekly for the first month and then monthly. He continues to receive monthly IVIG for hypogammaglobulinemia. After two years, CT demonstrates a significant decrease in pulmonary nodules and splenomegaly (Figure 2). The patient’s Forced Vital Capacity (FVC) improved from 3.78L (67% predicted) to 4.39L (79% predicted).

Conclusion: We report the first case of MALT Lymphoma seen in a patient with ALPS. It is unknown whether the unique FAS c.323A>G mutation in the non-death domain contributes to MALT lymphoma progression. We propose MALT lymphoma is a malignant transformation of chronic inflammation that has the potential to occur in patients with ALPS. In the future, improved knowledge of mechanistic pathways of inflammation in lymphoma development and progression is important in the optimal management of ALPS.

A Caucasian girl was born at 32 weeks gestational age due to preterm labor. The infant’s initial and repeat TREC was undetectable on state newborn screen. Marked T cell lymphopenia was confirmed with CD3 57 cells/μL, CD4 40 cells/μL, CD8 13 cells/μL (naïve CD4 7.3%, naïve CD8 9.8%) and severe B and NK cell lymphopenia was also identified (CD16/CD56 83 cells/μL; CD19 12 cells/μL). Further immunologic evaluation revealed decreased mitogen proliferation to PHA (63,798; control 96,090-358,179), IgG of 350 and undetectable IgA and IgM. ADA and PNP were not decreased. The baby was started on atovaquone, fluconazole and IVIG for prophylaxis. At age 3 weeks, the baby developed an erythematous umbilical stump, erythematous ulcerative skin patches and plaques in her diaper area, and was found to have E.coli bacteremia.

Next generation sequencing of a panel of 207 primary immunodeficiency genes was done (Invitae) and identified a heterozygous variant in Rac2 (D57N), previously reported to be pathogenic with a similar clinical phenotype of severe bacterial infection, poor wound healing, umbilical stump abnormality, and severe T cell lymphopenia. Rac2 plays a critical role in neutrophil chemotaxis, rolling, adhesion, phagocytosis and superoxide production. Experimental studies have shown the D57N missense mutation a dominant negative effect on Rac2 function. This infant initially had a DHR with fMLP stimulation that was significantly impaired (6.06% fMLP ox-DHR; MFI fMLP 1.19), confirming her neutrophil dysfunction. She was switched to Bactrim for prophylaxis at 8 weeks of life. At age 10 weeks, the patient developed severe neutropenia (ANC 280 cells/μL), which has persisted to this day.

In this rare immunodeficiency, prognosis of patients with Rac2 deficiency is uncertain. While hematopoietic stem cell transplantation is the only potentially curative treatment option, little is known about the natural history of this combined immunodeficiency. This child has undergone transplant evaluation, which identified two 9/10 donors (both HLA-A mismatches), one 8/10 donor, and one potential 5/6 cord blood unit). At the current time, parents are not interested in transplantation. The father has been identified as a possible mosaic with the D57N variant identified. He reports delayed wound healing, but otherwise clinically well. Dad has deferred laboratory immune evaluation. Now at age 1, this patient’s T cell counts and function have significantly improved naturally, now with CD3 1657 cells/μL, CD4 1211cells/μL, CD8 386 cells/μ and normal lymphocyte proliferation to mitogens. Her NK cells and B cells remain markedly decreased (44 and 91 cells/μL respectively). Her ANC remains severely low (350 cells/μL). Interestingly, her neutrophil function also has improved somewhat (15.4% fMLP, MFI 1.23). She has continued on prophylaxis with IVIG, Bactrim, and fluconazole and done well clinically. She has had no further serious infections but has pronounced pathergy reactions with any minor skin trauma.

Roxane Labrosse, MD1, Julia Chu, MD, MPH2, Myriam Armant, PhD3, Jet Van Der Spek, MD4, Alexandra Miggelbrink, MD5, Johnson Fong, n/a6, John Everett, PhD7, Hayley Raymond, n/a8, Lyanna Kessler, n/a8, Colleen Dansereau, MSN, RN, CPN9, Brenda Mackinnon, RN10, Stephanie Koo, n/a11, Emily Morris, n/a11, Wendy London, PhD12, Ahmet Ozen, MD13, Safa Baris, MD13, Jenny Despotovic, DO14, Lisa Forbes, MD15, Akihiko Saitoh, MD, PhD16, Takayuki Takachi, MD17, Alejandra King, MD18, Mai Anh Thi Nguyen, MD19, Uyen Vy Vu Do, MD19, Frederic Bushman, PhD20, Anne Galy, PhD21, Luigi Notarangelo, MD, PhD22, David Williams, MD23, Sung-Yun Pai, MD24

Background Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome (WAS) is a rare X-linked disorder characterized by combined immunodeficiency, eczema, microthrombocytopenia, infections, autoimmunity and increased risk of hematological malignancies. Gene therapy (GT) using autologous CD34+ cells is an emerging alternative treatment with possible advantages over standard allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplant. We report the outcomes of a phase I/II clinical trial in which 5 WAS patients underwent GT using a self-inactivating lentiviral (SIN-LV) vector expressing the human WAS cDNA under the control of a 1.6kB fragment of the human WAS promoter.

Subjects and Methods: Five patients with severe WAS (clinical score 3-5) were enrolled (Table 1). CD34+ cells were transduced ex-vivo and re-infused after conditioning with busulfan and fludarabine. Two subjects (P4, P5) had autoimmunity pre-GT, manifested as skin vasculitis and autoimmune cytopenias.

Results: All subjects were alive at median follow-up of 5.1 (range 2.8-6.3) years. Multi-lineage vector gene marking was sustained over time. All had clinical improvement of eczema, infections and bleeding diathesis. WAS protein (WASP) expression was increased over baseline but remained below normal levels. Proliferation of T cells in response to anti-CD3 improved post-GT. Humoral immune deficiency improved, with normalization of IgM, and independence from Ig replacement and vaccine responses in those tested. Platelet levels increased to >50 x 103 cells/uL in only the two subjects with a VCN ≥2 in transduced stem cells. Podosome formation in monocyte-derived dendritic cells was near absent pre-GT and improved in all subjects post-GT, but only reached healthy control levels in the 2 subjects with highest VCN. In contrast to other trials using this SIN-LV, two patients (P4 and P5) had flares of autoimmunity post-GT, offering the opportunity to study the poorly understood mechanistic features of immune dysregulation in this disease. Self-reactive VH4-34-expressing B cells and CD21lo B cells remained elevated in most patients. However, despite WASP expression in FOXP3+ Tregs, those with autoimmunity had poor numerical recovery of T cells and Tregs at the time of clinical symptoms (Fig 1A). In addition, IL-10 producing regulatory B cells (Bregs) were highly deficient pre-GT, recovered in subjects who did not experience autoimmunity, but failed to recover in P4 and P5 (Fig 1B). Moreover, transitional B cells, which are enriched in Bregs and are potent inducers of Treg populations, also recovered poorly in those two subjects (Fig 1C).

In summary, our data confirm and extend the safety and efficacy of GT in correcting disease manifestations associated with WAS, with the longest overall follow-up reported so far in studies using SIN-LV. In addition, our findings suggest that higher VCN is needed in order to correct myeloid compartments such as platelets and monocytes. Finally, we report the novel finding of the restoration of Bregs and suggest that recovery of this compartment, along with Tregs, is protective against development of autoimmunity post-GT. Overall, these data suggest a mechanism for breakdown of immune tolerance in WAS with important therapeutic implications and prognostic value.

This is an 8-year-old Hispanic female who initially presented with failure to thrive, recurrent fevers and intermittent cough with episodes of perioral cyanosis. Symptoms started at age 6 months and were attributed to recurrent viral and bacterial infections. At 14 months old, she was hospitalized with fever and hypoxemia (O2 saturations 70%). CXR showed prominent interstitial lung markings and she was diagnosed with pneumonia. CT scan confirmed CXR findings and ruled out anatomical anomaly. She was lost to follow up for 2 years, and re-presented with worsening respiratory status. A repeat CT scan demonstrated worsening interstitial thickening. Immune workup, including quantitative immunoglobulins, CH50, lymphocyte subsets and vaccine response titers (pneumococcal and tetanus), was unremarkable, except for elevated IgG levels. Genetic testing for surfactant dysfunction mutations was negative. Thoracoscopic lung biopsy revealed interstitial fibrosis, PAS-positive granular alveolar proteinosis, type II cell hyperplasia, and lymphoid follicles. At age 6, she was admitted for a pericardial effusion. Rheumatology was consulted for evaluation frequent fevers and persistently elevated inflammatory markers, with concern that the pericarditis was autoinflammatory. She had an elevated ANA (>1:2560 homogeneous pattern), IL-6 (378.88 pg/mL), and IgG (2020 mg/dL) at that time. She had an atypical ANCA pattern with positive myeloperoxidase antibodies. Anti dsDNA, Smith and Scl70 were negative. She was treated with steroids and hydroxychloroquine with some improvement in her oxygen requirement. One year later she had an additional episode of pericarditis, treated with colchicine. A few months later, she was admitted with new-onset gross hematuria and elevated serum creatinine (to 2 mg/dl). Kidney biopsy showed ANCA vasculitis with glomerulonephritis (75% crescents, no scarring or fibrosis). She provisionally received a diagnosis of microscopic polyangiitis, with lung and kidney involvement. She did not have peripheral vasculopathy. She was started on cyclophosphamide, Rituximab, and IV steroid pulses. Cyclophosphamide was discontinued due to recurrent episodes of posterior reversible encephalopathy syndrome (PRES) after infusion. Her IgG level decreased as she developed nephrotic range proteinuria. A primary immunodeficiency genetic panel was sent to evaluate for monogenic immune dysregulation syndromes and revealed a TMEM173 gene mutation (c.463G>A) which has previously been reported in 4 other subjects with SAVI (STING-associated vasculopathy of infancy syndrome). STING is a cytosolic DNA sensor that leads to type I interferon production upon stimulation. This gain-of-function mutation was confirmed by measuring interferon signature gene expression at the NIH (Fig 1), and her diagnosis was revised accordingly. The patient was started on a JAK-inhibitor (Tofacitinib) to block interferon signaling. Unfortunately, the patient is now deceased, due to overwhelming infection and multi-organ system failure. Conclusion: Genetic testing can be crucial in aiding the diagnosis of complex patients with immune dysregulation and can provide an opportunity for targeted therapy, which should be employed as soon as able to stop disease progression.

Background: Activated phosphoinositide 3-kinase δ syndrome (APDS-1) was first described in 2013 as a monogenetic immune dysregulation syndrome with a variable phenotype. Increased sinopulmonary and herpesvirus infections are well described, but fungal infections such as candidiasis have been rare. To date, disseminated histoplasmosis has not been described.

History: A 38 yo Caucasian male who was previously diagnosed with common variable immunodeficiency (CVID) in late childhood due to recurrent sinopulmonary infections presented with recurrent fever, pancytopenia, severe splenomegaly, and lymphadenopathy. Urine histoplasmosis antigen and beta-D-glucan were elevated. A bone marrow biopsy demonstrated granulomatous inflammation. Transbronchial biopsy of a subcarinal lymph node was consistent with granulomatous disease. This led to a diagnosis of disseminated histoplasmosis. He was treated with amphotericin B and then 11 months of itraconazole, with improvement of his symptoms.

He was admitted to the hospital about 7 years later when he presented with fatigue, fever, chills, dark urine, and scleral icterus. He was found to have an acute worsening of chronic anemia with a hemoglobin of 4.7 g/dL. Due to elevated LDH, presence of schistocytes on peripheral smear, and undetectable haptoglobin, he was diagnosed with autoimmune hemolytic anemia, despite a negative direct Coombs. A bone marrow biopsy specimen was hypercellular with marked erythroid predominance, with normal flow cytometry and no blasts identified. Infectious workup was negative.

CT chest during the workup revealed new right hilar and mediastinal lymphadenopathy, in addition to calcified right hilar and subcarinal lymph nodes, bronchiectasis, and stable hepatosplenomegaly. Transbronchial biopsy of lymph nodes showed benign lymph nodes with calcified necrotizing granulomata and presence of non-viable fungal species, presumably “old” Histoplasmosis.

Discussion: Gain-of-function variants leading to increased PI3kδ activity have been shown to cause both B and T cell dysfunction, leading to impaired immunologic responses to bacterial and viral infections. Recurrent sinopulmonary infections and herpesvirus infections are commonly seen and while mucocutaneous candidiasis has been reported in cohorts of patients with PIK3CD, other fungal infections are not common. Severe disseminated histoplasmosis infections have been described in primary immunodeficiencies characterized by signaling defects in the IL-12/IFN-γ pathway, STAT3 deficiency, CD40L deficiency, GATA2 deficiency and in STAT1 gain-of-function mutations. To our knowledge, disseminated histoplasmosis has not been previously reported in patients with PIK3CD immunodeficiency.

The reported case represents the first case of NBAS disease detected by newborn screening program for primary immunodeficiency, based on KREC assay. The patient came to our attention due to the complete absence of KRECs and normal TRECs on DBS (dried blood spot) while hospitalized for low weight at birth (1,520 g), intolerance for enteral feeding, hepatosplenomegaly, slightly elevated liver transaminase, head and face eczematous dermatitis. During the 1st month, he also presented Klebsiella pneumoniae urinary tract infection and methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus sepsis. Peculiar phenotypic features including triangular face, proptosis, flat philtrum, mild retrognatia, hirsutism, loose and slightly wrinkled skin, and apparent reduction of subcutaneous fat were noticed at birth. Complete blood count showed lymphocytopenia, marked hypereosinophilia. Serum immunoglobulin G (IgG) were markedly decreased, IgA and IgM were undetectable. Extended immune-phenotyping showed complete absence of CD19+ cells, low count of CD8+ lymphocytes, and reduced natural killer (NK) levels. At 9month of age a colonoscopy was carried out for persistent diarrhea and reduced tolerance to enteral feeding. The histological examination of mucosal intestinal biopsies showed signs compatible with autoimmune enteropathy. For this reason immunosuppressive therapy with rapamycin was started without consistent clinical amelioration. Many CVC-sepsis occurred in the last months, associated with persistent gastrointestinal symptoms and severe growth restriction. Despite the absence of experience data in literature for NBAS syndrome, we retain that HSCT represents the only resolutive therapy for him.

Case: A 31-year-old female with asthma and allergies presented to immunology clinic with a history of chronic fatigue and sinusitis. Fatigue occurred daily every 2-3 weeks and was described as not feeling rested even after 12 hours of sleep. Chronic sinusitis required 4-5 prolonged antibiotic courses per year. Nasal cultures grew Methicillin-sensitive and -resistant Staphylococcus aureus and Haemophilus influenzae type b (Hib). Three separate sinus surgeries over the prior few years reduced her sinus symptoms. Other infectious history was significant for recurrent urinary tract infections with E. coli and Klebsiella, recurrent otitis media as a child, and a diagnosis of transient hypogammaglobulinemia of infancy that resolved at 4 years of age.

Review of systems revealed axillary lymphadenopathy for 2-3 days twice per year not related to infection. She had longstanding eczema that responded to topical tacrolimus, multiple environmental allergies, and recently diagnosed asthma that improved with inhaled Budesonide/Formoterol. As a teenager she received allergy immunotherapy for a few years but stopped due to frequent adverse reactions. Family history revealed that father died from cancer. Physical exam was unremarkable.

Laboratory evaluation demonstrated normal IgG 874 mg/dL, IgM 133 mg/dL, IgA 166 mg/dL, elevated IgE 457 mg/dL, normal T and NK cell enumeration, mildly low total B cells (180 cells/mcl, 5.6%), and normal B cell subsets (CD19+IgM+CD27- 67%, CD19+IgM+CD27+ 17%, CD19+IgM-CD27+ 13%). Tetanus antibody titer was protective, but Hib antibody titer was undetectable at < 0.15 mcg/mL with marginal response after vaccination (0.53 mcg/mL). Pneumococcal serotype specific IgG levels (Mayo) were mostly undetectable with 3 of 23 serotypes protective at baseline and only 4 protective post vaccination with Pneumovax 23. CD3/CD28 blastogenesis was poor. Due to poor antibody response and continued sinus infections she was started on IgG replacement. Her fatigue and sinus symptoms improved moderately but she continued to require antibiotics and sinus CT scans continued to demonstrate significant disease. A focused exome sequencing panel was pursued and a novel heterozygous CARD11 variant was found (c.215G>T, p.R72L).

Discussion: The CARD11/BCL10/MALT1 (CBM) complex is a critical signaling adapter that facilitates several downstream immune responses predominately through NF-kB. Mutations in several different domains of CARD11 result in a clinical entity collectively referred to as CARD11-associated atopy with dominant interference of NF-kB signaling (CADINS). CADINS is associated with a broad range of clinical manifestations but most have marked atopy with infections, poor T cell proliferation, and varying levels of poor antibody response.

Both our variant (p.R72L) and a previously reported pathogenic variant in the same amino acid (p.R72G) involve a change from a charged arginine to a non-polar amino acid in the critical BCL10/CARD11 binding interface. IκBα degradation was not present in B cells from our patient (Figure 1) confirming the functional defect in NF- kB signaling. Thus, we present a novel variant that fits CADINS both clinically and genetically. Clinicians should be aware of CADINS when patients present with recurrent infections in the setting of significant allergic disease.

Figure 1. Defective NF-kB activation in primary B cells from patient with CARD 11 variant (p.R72L). We performed an IκBα degradation assay for the patient compared to a control. Unstimulated B cell populations are depicted in the left column. B cells were stimulated with phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate (PMA) for 20 minutes depicted in the middle and right columns. The patient demonstrates absent IκBα degradation compared to control. (Right column: light blue line = unstimulated, red line = PMA stimulated).

I B degradation assay.Stimulation: 200 μL of whole blood was stimulated in a 5 mL FACS tube with 50 ng/mL phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate (PMA; Sigma, Cat# P1585) at 37 °C for 5, 10, or 20 min, at which point 4 mL of pre-warmed 1X Lyse/Fix buffer (BD, Cat# 558049) was added. Cells were fixed for 10 min at 37 °C, centrifuged and washed twice with FACS buffer (PBS supplemented with 2% FBS and 1 mM EDTA). Staining and permeabilization: Fc receptors were blocked for 5 min at RT (Human TruStain FcX; Biolegend), followed by a 20 min stain on ice with anti-CD4 AF647 (clone RPA-T4; Biolegend), and anti-CD19 BV421 (clone HIB19; Biolegend). Cells were washed with FACS buffer and permeabilized for 30 min on ice with 1 mL Phosflow Perm Buffer II (BD Biosciences, Cat# 558052) that had been pre-cooled to -20 °C. After permeabilization, two mL FACS buffer was added and the samples were centrifuged. After three additional washes, the cells were stained with anti-IкBα PE (clone 25/IkBa/MAD-3; BD Biosciences) for 30 min at RT. Samples were washed three times and data were collected on a Cytek DxP10 flow cytometer. Data were analyzed with FlowJo software.

Introduction: Wiskott-Aldrich Syndrome (WAS) is a rare, but well-defined X-linked disorder. Loss-of-function mutations in the WAS gene result in classic WAS and X-linked thrombocytopenia (XLT), while gain-of-function mutations lead to X-linked neutropenia (XLN). Classic WAS phenotypic features include recurrent infections, microthrombocytopenia and eczema along with increased susceptibility to autoimmune disorders and malignancy. Most males with classic WAS are diagnosed in early childhood and early death can result from its various clinical manifestations.

Case: We present a 32-year-old male who was referred to immunology for hypogammaglobulinemia. As an infant he had moderate eczema, and at the age of two was diagnosed with immune thrombocytopenia (ITP) with baseline platelets of 50-60 x 10^9/L. Infectious history was notable for one episode of pneumosepsis and recurrent otitis media, influenza, and herpes labialis infections. Around the age of 22, he was diagnosed with common variable immunodeficiency (CVID) based on the finding of low immunoglobulins. He developed diffuse large B cell lymphoma at age 26, and was treated with cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine, prednisone and rituximab (CHOP-R). At age 32 he developed abdominal pain with bloody stools. Investigations confirmed an endoscopic and pathologic diagnosis of ulcerative colitis. Due to the severity of his disease, he has required maintenance therapy with vedolizumab. He was again noted to have hypogammaglobulinemia at which point he was referred to immunology at our centre. There was no significant family history of immunodeficiency, malignancy or autoimmunity. Blood work was notable for normal white blood cell and lymphocyte counts, platelets of 60 x 10^9 g/L, low IgG at 4.82 g/L (7.0-16.0 g/L) with normal IgA, IgM and IgE. Lymphocyte subsets including T, B and NK cells were within the normal range. Genetic testing was performed and he was found to have a known pathogenic mutation in the WAS gene (c.1453G>A, p.Asp485Asn) which has been previously reported in association with WAS and XLT. He has since been placed on immunoglobulin replacement and has been referred for consideration of hematopoietic stem cell transplantation.

Discussion: WAS is a rare syndrome that can have a similar phenotype to other immunodeficiency disorders including CVID, Omenn syndrome and IPEX (immune dysregulation, polyendocrinopathy, X-linked). Individuals with CVID present with hypogammaglobulinemia and recurrent infections, and these individuals also have an increased susceptibility to autoimmune disorders, gastrointestinal disease and malignancies, especially lymphoma. Although eczema is a common disorder, its presence in addition to features of early onset thrombocytopenia, immunodeficiency, autoimmunity and/or malignancy in male patients should heighten the suspicion for WAS. It is important to make the diagnosis of WAS as hematopoietic cell transplantation and gene therapy are potentially curative treatment options.

Secondary immune deficiencies (SID) are caused by varied mechanisms and are common in patients with hematological malignancies such as chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) and multiple myeloma (MM). In this setting, both the disease and its treatment (such as B cell ablation therapy) contribute to the development of secondary antibody deficiency.

Infections remain a major cause of morbidity and mortality in CLL and MM patients. This underscores the need for early recognition and stratification of risks in order to guide appropriate treatment, including immunoglobulin replacement therapy (IgRT). New guidelines for the use of human normal immune globulins in SID patients were implemented by the European Medicines Agency (EMA) in 2019. Despite these new guidelines, significant variations remain across European countries in the assessment and approaches aiming to achieve reduction in infection burden, including different strategies for initiation, dosing and discontinuation of IgRT. The same is true for North America where IgRT is widely used off-label to prevent infections in patients with SID due to hematological disease or other reasons.

In order to address this variability, a Task Force comprising both Immunologists and Hemato-Oncologists drafted 20 statements aiming to test for consensus. Statements were related to six major areas: Definition of infections, Measuring IgG levels, Initiating IgRT, IgRT dosing, SCIg usage and Discontinuing IgRT. This was followed by an international Delphi consensus exercise in three rounds which aimed to develop recommendations on how to diagnose, treat and follow-up patients with antibody deficiency associated with hematological malignancies. The first Delphi round consisted in testing the 20 statements with a panel of SID specialists and subsequently their comments were used by the Task Force to refine the statements.

The cut-off for overall agreement was 4 “I somewhat agree”. If the expert chose level 4 or less the reasons underpinning his/her choice were discussed. Consensus was achieved for all statements on level 4 (“I somewhat agree”). Only 5 statements did not achieve consensus on level 5 “I mostly agree”.

In Delphi Round 3, panelists who had not “mostly agreed” with these five statements were given the opportunity to reconsider their assessment based on the feedback from other panelists, which was shared with them. The panelists then chose to maintain or refine their assessment.

Introduction: Mast cells (MCs) are hematopoietic-derived immune cells, whose precursors migrate within tissues reaching maturation and differentiation. Masitinib, a selective tyrosine kinase inhibitor, is efficient in controlling the survival, differentiation, and degranulation of MCs.

Aim: To optimize mast cell-differentiation from human bone marrow (BM) hematopoietic stem cells, and to find best cell culture conditions for proliferation, differentiation, and maintenance of MCs, which is important when studying particularly MCs’ response to cytotoxic compounds.

Material-Methods: To produce MCs in vitro, the first method (M1) we used was a modified semi-solid culture method (1). Briefly; human BM mononuclear cells (MNCs) were obtained with Ficoll gradient from BM sample of a patient with idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura. Colony-forming unit (CFU)-mast was developed from MNCs in methylcellulose medium supplemented with SCF (200ng/ml) + IL-6 (50ng/ml), and IL-3 (1ng/ml; only first week). 5-6 weeks later mast cell colonies were transferred into suspension cultures, in which MCs matured and multiplied up to 7-8 weeks and were used in experiments till 10th week of culture. On the other hand, in our second method (M2); MNCs were separated by Ficoll, seeded in 6 well-plates with IMDM containing FBS 2%, Pen/Strep, and a little amount of methylcellulose, and incubated at 37oC, 5%CO2. Cultures were then supplemented with IMDM (FBS 1%) + SCF (100ng/ml) + IL-6 (50ng/ml) on day 4; and IMDM (FBS 2%) + SCF (100ng/ml) + IL-6 (50ng/ml) + IL-3 (1ng/ml) on day 9. Beginning on day 18 till the end, IMDM (FBS 2%) + SCF (100ng/ml) + IL-6 (50ng/ml) were added to cultures.

For both methods, morphological assessment of colonies/cells were evaluated under an inverted microscope (Figure 1 and 2). Verification of MCs was performed by immunoflorescence staining for anti-tryptase and -chymase antibodies, and by toluidine blue staining. Macrophages were verified by anti-CD-68 immunoflorescence staining. MCs were exposed to masitinib or DMSO for the evaluation of dose-related effects of masitinib, and cytotoxicity was evaluated by MTT assay.

Results: In M2, culture conditions were easier to handle compared to M1. In M2, high amounts of MCs in immature and pre-mature forms were appeared as early as 15-18 days, and peak levels of proliferation rate was around 2-4 weeks of culture, which was about 3 weeks earlier than M1. Culture could be maintained till 10 weeks in both methods. Although MCs are non-adherent cells, in liquid method adherent BM cells such as fibroblasts, endothelial cells and mesenchymal stem cells have adhered to the plate and grown up, providing an attachment site for MCs and serving as a natural BM nest, mimicking in-vivo environment, for MCs to grow and proliferate (Figure 2). Attachment of MCs has provided medium exchange available without changing culture dishes. When MCs were exposed to masitinib (0.5, 1, and 2 μM/μl), approximate survival rates were 75%, 72%, 69%, respectively.

Discussion: In our liquid medium method, the adherent BM cells not only provided a natural nest supporting MC development and differentiation, they also served as an attachment site for MCs. As the cells slightly adhered, when trypsinized shortly, they easily detached and used for experiments. And we also report for the first time that adding a little amount of methylcellulose to the liquid medium provides ease of aggregation of CFUs, and easy development of MCs. We suggest that our liquid culture may be superior to semi-solid method, that it is faster and easier to handle.

A population pharmacokinetic (PopPK) analysis was conducted on data from 3 studies performed in the United States (US) and Canada. In all 3 clinical studies treatment-experienced primary immunodeficiency (PI) patients received intravenous (IV) doses of Immune Globulin Injection (Human), 10% Caprylate/Chromatography Purified (IGIV-C 10%) in the Run-in/IV Phase. In 2 studies subjects crossed over to subcutaneous (SC) IGIV-C 10%, and in the third study crossover was to Immune Globulin SC (Human), 20% Caprylate/Chromatography Purified (IGSC 20%).

A total of 95 PI patients from these 3 studies were included in the PopPK analysis and 1841 serum IgG concentrations were included in the final PK analysis. The PK of IgG following IV and SC administration was adequately described by a two-compartment model with first-order elimination from the central compartment. Administration of IGIV was modeled as an infusion directly into the central compartment. Absorption of exogenous IgG from the depot site of SC infusions into the central compartment was modeled as a first-order process with an absorption rate constant (KA). The full model was constructed by incorporation (forward selection process) of covariates of interest into the model. After completion of the covariate model development, the final model showed that IgG PK was not influenced by (a) the IGSC formulation used in the different studies (10% vs. 20%), (b) gender, and (c) age (pediatric vs. adult). Body weight was identified as a significant covariate having an effect on clearance and volume of distribution.

Based on the final PK results, serum clearance of IgG for the reference population was estimated to be 0.150 L/day. The volume of distribution of the central and peripheral compartments accounted for 3.06 L and 1.93 L, respectively. The inter-compartmental clearance was 0.474 L/day, and the absorption constant from the depot (KA) was 0.246 day-1. The absolute bioavailability of IgG after SC administration was calculated as 70.5%.

The developed method was used to evaluate alternative dosing intervals following SC administration. The equivalent of a weekly IGSC maintenance dose administered 1, 2, 3, 5, or 7 times per week, or biweekly produced overlapping steady-state concentration–time profiles and similar area under the concentration versus time curve (AUC), maximum concentration (Cmax), and minimum concentration (Cmin) values. The results of the evaluation and simulations for IgG exposure following a switch from IGIV-C 10% dosing (every 3- or 4-weeks) to SC dosing further suggest that a range of dose-adjustment factors (DAF), from 1:1 to 1:1.37 would be sufficient to provide clinically effective trough IgG concentrations throughout the course of treatment at various treatment frequencies.

Background and aims: The immunological concept of autoinflammation made possible development of new cytokine target therapies and catalogue Autoinflammatory Diseases (AID). However, in 50% or more, no causative gene can be found going down to Undefined Inflammatory Syndromes (UIS). Anti-IL1 drugs (AIL1D) revolutionized some IL-1 mediated diseases, such as TRAPS, CAPS, Hyper-IgD/MKD and FMF. Nevertheless, treatment response among disorders are not the same as well as no specific study was designed for UIS. Papa et al, 2019, recently suggested the use of anakinra for the treatment of UIS, especially those refractory/intolerant to colchicine with severe or very symptomatic phenotype. This paper aims to retrospectively report for the first time the experience with canakinumab in monogenic and multifactorial disorders in a single, private center in Brazil. Patient and Methods: Patients’s records that received canakinumab from January 2016 to December 2019 at Clinica Croce, IMA-Brazil, were revised. Demographic and clinical data were extracted and descriptively described. All statistical analysis are presented as: average (minimal; maximum; standard deviation). Results: A total of 23 patients with autoinflammatory diseases were enrolled and 65% (n=15) are female. Of them, 65% (n=15) patients had a monogenic disease: 26% (n=6) CAPS, 21% (n=5 FMF), 4% (n=1) MKD, 4% (n=1) homozygous NLCR4 and 4% (n=1) PAMI syndrome. Multifactorial disorders were 39% (n=9) patients : 8% (n=2) Recurrent Idiopatic Pericarditis, 8% (n=2) Schnitizler Syndrome and 21% (n=5) UIS. The average age of the first symptoms was 12,51 years (0;69;19,78) and the average age of diagnosis was 24,43 years (0;72;21,76) while the aveage of diagnosis delay was 11,59 years (1;59;15,16). All patients had used, prior to anti-IL1, corticosteroids with 100% prevalence of Cushing Syndrome and 69% (n=16) tried at least one steroid sparing agent without clinical success due to: intolerance or non-effective disease control or side effects. In the FMF group (n=5) 100% tried colchicine prior to canakinumab and this drug was not effective to 60% because of amyloidosis status and in 40% colchicine-induced hepatitis was observed. Canakinumab was effective for disease control in 75% (n=23) considering: control of clinical manifestations, amyloidosis reversion and normalization of acute reactants markers. The only side effect observed during the follow up were acute flu-like symptoms and psicomotor agitation (33,34% , n = 8). The average time of follow up is of 12,51 months (1;37;12,46). Canakinumab could be discontinued in just one patient with UIS. Conclusions: This is the first report of Canakinumab use for autoinflammatory disorders in Brazil. Canakinumab is an effective and safe drug for monogenic and multifactorial disorders control. No serious adverse effect could be observed in the 3 years maximum follow up of this drug. Neither, no specific infectious disease more prevalent in south America, such as yellow fever, dengue, zika or chikungunya was observed.

A 21-year-old caucasian male with autosomal recessive Hyper IgM syndrome Type 2 (HIGM2) due to AICDA mutation, diagnosed at age 1, presented with a newly developed mediastinal mass. He receives routine IVIG, pulmonary function tests (PFT’s) and chest x-rays.

At age 16, patient was noted to have cervical and inguinal lymphadenopathy. CT scan indicated left mediastinal, hilar and pleural lymphadenopathy with soft tissue infiltration around the descending thoracic aorta and esophagus. Biopsy indicated no evidence of a lymphoma or infection.

5 years after initial workup, routine PFT’s showed a declining diffusion capacity by 50%. Patient complained of intermittent chest pain but displayed no clinical symptoms of cough, dyspnea, dysphagia or reflux. CT scan which revealed an extensive ill-defined soft tissue mass extending from the thoracic outlet to the level of the esophageal hiatus that encased vascular structures resulting in narrowing and occlusion of left upper lobe pulmonary artery and left lower lobe pulmonary arteries respectively. Imaging demonstrated homogenous ventilation to bilateral lungs and decreased perfusion in the left lung compared to the right lung. Infectious workup was negative for atypical infections.

Biopsy revealed miced cellular infiltrate with no predominenant cell type or evidence of malignancy, consistent with previous lymph node biopsy 5 years prior. CD20 and CD3 stains revealed aggregates and scattered B-cells and T-cells, respectively. Removal of mass was proposed but due to the ambiguous borders and location, surgical excision was not possible.

Patient was given 4 doses of Rituximab (75g), 3 doses 10mg/kg pulse steroids 18 hours apart, and daily sirolimus (level was adjusted based on sirolimus level). Follow-up CT scan indicated significant interval improvement with 50-60% reduction of the soft tissue mass. Blood flow in the left lower lobe pulmonary artery has still not returned. This may be due to collaterals and may be a separate problem from compression due to the mass.

Cytotoxic T-lymphocyte antigen 4 (CTLA-4) is an inhibitory immune regulator critical for governing T and B cell homeostasis. Heterozygous CTLA4 mutations can cause a syndrome of immune dysregulation with a variable clinical phenotype including hypogammaglobulinemia , autoimmune cytopenia and endocrinopathies, lymphoproliferation, predisposition to malignancy, tissue specific lymphocytic infiltration of brain, lung and GI tract as well as colitis.

We retrospectively reviewed medical records of all patients with CTLA4 haploinsufficiency evaluated at the NIH between 2014-2019. A pathologic variant in CTLA4 was confirmed in all patients. We analyzed frequency of Campylobacter species detected in the stool samples by PCR based Biofilm Rapid array as well as reflex bacterial stool and blood cultures when available.

Forty-six patients aged 8-75 years were evaluated at the NIH between 2014 and 2019. Six of 46 patients (13%) had at least one episode of Campylobacter species associated acute or worsening diarrhea, with one patient also having Campylobacter bacteremia. All patients with positive Campylobacter species in stool samples had clinical histories and/or endoscopic biopsy findings consistent with enteropathy or colitis predating the incidence of Campylobacter infection. Two of the six patients (33%) had recurrent or chronic Campylobacter infection, while four of the six patients (67%) had multiple gastrointestinal pathogens detected by stool pathogen screening at various times.

Conclusions: Campylobacter species infection of the gastrointestinal tract seem to occur at an increased incidence in our CTLA4 haploinsufficient cohort. To the best of our knowledge, this is the initial report for the association between CTLA4 haploinsufficiency and Campylobacter species infection of the gastrointestinal tract. Although CTLA-4 is a critical immune checkpoint involved in mucosal immune homeostasis and gut microbiota-immune system cross talk, the underlying mechanism predisposing to Campylobacter infection in CTLA-4 deficient patients remains to be explored. Our study suggests screening of stool for Campylobacter species in patients with CTLA4 haploinsufficiency associated enteropathy.

Hye Sun Kuehn, PhD1, Sara Ciullini Mannurita, MSc2, Tala Shahin, n/a3, Julie Niemela, MS, MLS4, Jennifer Stoddard, BS, MLS5, Mary Hintermeyer, APNP6, Raul Jimenez Heredia, PhD7, Mary Garofalo, RN8, Laura Lucas, CPNP, MSN, RN9, Annalisa Tondo, MD10, Sylvain Latour, PhD11, James Verbsky, MD, PhD12, John Routes, MD13, Charlotte Cunningham-Rundles, MD, PhD14, Kaan Boztug, MD15, Eleonora Gambineri, MD16, Thomas Fleisher, MD. PhD17, Shanmuganathan Chandrakasan, MD. PhD18, Sergio Rosenzweig, MD, PhD19

7Technical assistant/St. Anna Children's Hospital and Children's Cancer Research Institute, Department of Pediatrics, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna; Ludwig Boltzmann Institute for Rare and Undiagnosed Diseases, Vienna; CeMM Research Centre for Molecular Medicine of the Austrian Academy of Sciences, Vienna, Austria

15Director LBI-RUD/St. Anna Children's Hospital and Children's Cancer Research Institute, Department of Pediatrics, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna; Ludwig Boltzmann Institute for Rare and Undiagnosed Diseases, Vienna; CeMM Research Centre for Molecular Medicine of the Austrian Academy of Sciences, Vienna, Austria; Department of Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria

IKAROS transcription factor and IKAROS family members are critical for development of lymphocytes and other blood cell lineages. Full length IKAROS (isoform 1) contains six C2H2 zinc fingers (ZF), four N-terminal DNA binding ZF and two C-terminal dimerization ZF. Somatic IKAROS mutations and deletions have been associated with increased predisposition to B- Acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) as well with poor disease prognosis. Recently, germline IKAROS mutations affecting the N-terminal DNA binding domain and acting in a haploinsufficiency or dominant negative manner were reported to be associated with common variable immunodeficiency (CVID) and combined immunodeficiency (CID), respectively. Herein we describe a novel set of germline heterozygous IKAROS allelic variants affecting the C-terminal dimerization domains in four unrelated families. Clinical manifestations include hematopoietic cytopenias presenting as Evans syndrome, and hematologic malignancies including T-cell ALL and Burkitt lymphoma; other manifestations observed were B-cell lymphopenia and hypogammaglobinemia, but recurrent or severe infections were not prevalent or characteristic. We demonstrate that mutants affecting dimerization abolish IKAROS homodimerization as well as heterodimerization with IKAROS family members AIOLOS and HELIOS. These variants also affect DNA binding at dimerization sites and pericentromeric targeting. Opposed to previous allelic variants reported, dimerization changes alter post-translational sumoylation and gene transcription regulation. Our data show that mutations affecting IKAROS dimerization are mainly associated with cytopenias and/or malignancies, have a different mechanism of action than previously reported variants, present with incomplete clinical penetrance, and contribute to the growing spectrum of genotype-phenotype IKAROS associated diseases.

4Director, Division of Intramural Research; Chief, Immunopathogenesis Section/Laboratory of Clinical Immunology and Microbiology (LCIM), Division of Intramural Research (DIR), National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID), National Institutes of Health (NIH), Bethesda, MD, USA

Introduction: There has been much discussion regarding the return of secondary findings in genetic sequencing research. Opinions differ on whether researchers should return secondary findings to participants at all and if so, what the best method is to do so. We have opted to systematically identify and return pertinent secondary findings to participants in our cohort of patients with immune-mediated diseases that undergo exome sequencing. Additionally, exome sequencing may determine multiple or other genetic diagnoses in addition to the primary diagnosis, which we call “incidental findings.” Here, we discuss the secondary and incidental findings discovered in our cohort thus far.

Methods: Individuals in our protocol underwent consent for exome sequencing, including a discussion of the possibility of secondary findings. Exome sequencing data was analyzed, and variant pathogenicity was scored using the ACMG criteria (Richards et al); Variants determined to be likely pathogenic, pathogenic, or otherwise clinically important were confirmed via CLIA-certified sanger sequencing. Confirmed variants were returned to participants. We then queried internal databases for cases involving secondary and incidental findings.

Results: As of November 2019, exome sequencing, interpretation and reporting had been completed for 629 participants. We detected a total of 18 secondary findings in 17 (2.7%) participants, including variants in APOB, BRCA1(2), BRCA2 (5), DSP, FBN1, KCNH2, LDLR, MYBPC3 (2), RYR1, PKP2 (2), and VHL. Additionally, we detected possible dual/multiple genetic diagnoses in 18 (2.9%) participants, some of which explained an unusual clinical presentation or symptom. These included individuals with variants in multiple immune-related genes, including one individual with variants in GATA2 and TNFRSF1A, and those with variants in genes related to multiple organ systems, including an individual with variants in IFNGR1 and SCO2.

Discussion: Exome sequencing in this cohort detects not only important secondary findings, but also discovers a significant portion of individuals with multiple genetic diagnoses. Notably, exome sequencing may provide further context or explanation for unusual phenotypic presentation and help determine specific symptom etiology even when a primary genetic etiology is already known. Additionally, these secondary and incidental finds may be important to consider when delineating risks and symptoms of novel or recently-discovered conditions.

Background: Immune dysregulation and lymphoproliferative disorders including ALPS like disease, HLH EBV driven lymphoproliferative disease leading to rare lymphomas require a multidisciplinary approach utilizing expertise in Immunology and Hematology/Oncology to care for these patients as we learn the molecular etiology of their underlying disorders. At Texas Children’s Hospital, the Immunology Lymphoproliferative evaluation and diagnostic (iLEAD) clinic was created to provide a comprehensive clinical and research approach to caring for patients with these rare disorders. In an effort to streamline care and access, we recently on-boarded an advanced practice provider (APP) .

Methods: A chart review was conducted 6 months before and after on-boarding the APP for iLEAD patient visits. We reviewed the following patient care and access parameters to determine increase in efficient and effective patient care as well as improved access to the clinic. These parameters included: Referral Process, time of referral placement to appointment, number of patient visits, wait time in clinic, lab interpretation and reporting time for disseminating results to families, and collaboration process with other specialties.

Results: Within 2 months of the APP starting our average wait from placing the referral to first appointment fell by an average of 45%. In addition, we created an algorithm to prioritize patients with immediate need to be seen. By streamlining the referral process and patient priority, we developed a “pre-clinic” conference process by which all patients are reviewed and preliminary plans are made prior to the patient’s arrival. This has translated into our ability to increase the number of patients seen in clinic from 4 to 6 and decreased the wait time in clinic by approximately 30 minutes. Since the APP started, no patient has been in clinic for more than 60 minutes. This has also led to an increase in RvU generation. In terms of efficiency in patient care, all labs are now ordered while in the room with the patient by the APP and physician providers. In turn, all labs are resulted directly to the APP who reviews labs, collaborates with physicians for care and reports to families in a timely fashion within 1-2 weeks of labs being resulted compared to greater than 1 month previously. To improve collaborator communication and post visit plans, a post-visit clinic summary was created. This has been effective in reducing the time to other specialty referrals, follow up visits and effective care for ongoing clinical needs.

Conclusions: The addition of an APP in our iLEAD multidisciplinary clinic which provides specialized care for patients with immune dysregulation and lymphoproliferative disorders effectively increases work productivity of providers and enhances patient care by increasing access to care, decreasing wait time in clinic and time of reporting of results and future plans. The APP with knowledge and expertise in immunology and immune dysregulation is a cost effective way to enhance provider and patient support. With the overwhelmingly positive results, future plans include expanding our multidisciplinary clinic to other services that care for patients with suspected immune deficiency.

Lisa Forbes, MD1, Olive Eckstein, MD2, Nitya Gulati, MD2, Erin Peckham-Gregory, PhD3, Nmazuo Ozuah, MD4, M. Cecilia Poli, MD PhD5, JW Caldwell, DO6, Juan C. Aldave-Becerra, MD PhD7, Stephen Jolles, MD, PhD8, Francesco Saettini, MD9, Hey Chong, MD, PhD10, Tiphanie Vogel, MD, PhD11, Emily Mace, PhD12, Jordan Orange, MD, PhD13, Asbjorg Stray-Pedersen, MD PhD14, Donna M. Muzny, MS15, Shalini N. Jhangiani, PhD16, Richard A. Gibbs, MD PhD17, Zeynep Coban-Akdemir, PhD18, James Lupski, MD, PhD19, Kenneth L. McClain, MD20, Carl E. Allen, MD PhD21, Ivan Chinn, MD22

Introduction: Pediatric lymphoproliferative disorders represent a clinically and genetically heterogeneous group of conditions. Misdiagnosis and delayed diagnosis can contribute to substantial morbidity and mortality. Identification of molecular etiologies and underlying disease mechanisms may facilitate timely interventions and guide targeted or curative therapies.

Methods: The study was performed through retrospective chart reviews in accordance with all local ethics and IRB committees. The study was designed to investigate a cohort of pediatric patients who met criteria for non-malignant lymphoproliferative disorders from Texas Children’s Hospital and collaborating centers for underlying genetic etiologies.

Results: A total of 51 affected individuals from 47 families met criteria. Distribution between male and females was nearly equivalent: males (n = 26) and females (n = 25). Approximately half of the cohort was Hispanic (n = 25). Overall Kaplan Meier survival was 67% (n = 39). Whole exome sequencing was performed in all subjects and available family members. Likely disease-causing genetic defects were identified in 29 of 47 families (62%). Within these 29 families, 20 (69%) carried variants in genes in International Union of Immunological Societies established primary immunodeficiency diseases. Potential novel genetic causes of immune deficiency or immune dysregulation were also discovered. Mechanistically, all of the implicated genes had roles in modulating lymphocyte activity; initial activation, cytoskeletal organization, or apoptosis of lymphocytes; or regulation of inflammation. All subjects less than one year of age had an identified gene in one of the three mechanistic categories with the dominant mechanistic genetic category being defective control of lymphocyte signaling (57%). In addition, 72% of patients between 1 and 8 years of age were found to have a potential genetic diagnosis underlying the LPD, with a more equal distribution of mechanistic categories compared to patients greater than 15 years of age where only 33% have a genetic cause. Other important disease manifestations identified were EBV-associated disease in 21 subjects (41%) and 15 subjects (24%) met HLH-2004 criteria.

Conclusion: Primary immunodeficiency diseases and other genetic abnormalities of the immune system underlie a significant percentage of pediatric lymphoproliferative disorder cases. Greater than 72% of patients less than 8 years of age have a genetic etiology underlying the lymphoproliferative disorder. Many of these gene defects can be treated with targeted therapies or hematopoietic stem cell transplantation. Genetic testing therefore plays an essential role in the diagnosis and management of children with these conditions.

A 21-year-old gentleman with a history of immune dysregulation polyendocrinopathy enteropathy X-linked (IPEX) syndrome with known pathogenic variant in FOXP3 presented to our emergency department with two witnessed episodes of tonic-clonic seizures earlier that day. He has had a longstanding history of recurrent infections and autoimmune conditions since birth, and was being treated with monthly IVIG infusions and sirolimus while awaiting bone marrow transplantation. His symptoms on admission included foaming at the mouth, generalized shaking, bladder incontinence, and tongue biting that lasted about five minutes. Family reported recent sores inside his mouth and lips, but denied any recent fevers, neck pain, headaches, chest pain, abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting, and sick contacts. He lives on a farm with livestock and reportedly had recent tick exposure. His last IVIG infusion was two weeks prior to admission, at which time he also received inactivated flu vaccine.

In the ED, a third seizure was witnessed by multiple medical providers. He subsequently received lorazepam and lacosamide with interval improvement. He underwent diagnostic lumbar puncture, as well as extensive evaluation for infections. He was started on empiric antibacterial and antiviral meningitis coverage. Analysis of the CSF showed a lymphocytic pleocytosis; bacterial cultures and HSV 1/2 PCR were negative, as was a 14-pathogen meningitis/encephalitis panel performed by PCR. EEG was negative for seizure-like activity, and brain MRI showed mild atrophy without sclerosis in the left hippocampus. Subsequently, anti-infectious therapy was stopped, and patient was discharged with outpatient follow-up scheduled for suspected non-infectious aseptic meningitis that was potentially triggered by flu vaccination versus IVIG. On day four post-discharge, however, PCR for Ehrlichia chaffeensis in the serum returned positive, and he was started on oral doxycycline.

Ehrlichiosis is a rare tick-borne illness that may cause various non-specific symptoms including fever, headaches, myalgias, and generalized malaise. Most prevalent in the mid-Atlantic regions of the United States, tick-borne Ehrlichia spreads through the mononuclear phagocytic system and can infiltrate many organs including the kidney, liver, lungs, and heart. CSF penetration can cause sometimes fatal meningoencephalitis. Aseptic meningitis due to Ehrlichiosis has been described in recent literature. Cases in HIV patients and transplant patients on chronic immunosuppressive therapy have been severe, resulting in organ dysfunction in many instances and death in a few. However, this case marks the first documented Ehrlichia infection in a patient with primary immunodeficiency. This patient’s presentation of aseptic meningitis and clear exposure history fits the clinical picture. His relatively benign course could be due to preserved T effector function not seen in persons with HIV or transplant patients with significant immunosuppression.

Patients with IPEX usually present with autoimmunity and allergies, but are also prone to significant infections. It is important to perform a comprehensive workup, including testing for atypical infections, in patients with immune dysregulation syndromes who present with symptoms of unclear etiology. Special attention should be paid to patients who live in areas with known endemic exposure risks. Empiric antibiotic therapy may need to be considered early to prevent delays in treatment.

Jessica Durkee-Shock, MD1, Megan Fisher, PhD2, Nurcicek Padem, MD3, Melanie Makhija, MD4, Ahmet Ozen, MD5, Laia Alsina, MD, PhD6, Hana Neibur, MD7, Nicholas Hartog, MD8, Jennifer Leiding, MD9, Rajesh Kumar, MD10, Erinn Kellner, MD10, Blanka Kaplan, MD11, Chrysi Kanellopoulou, PhD12, Brianne Navetta-Modrov, MD11, Jenna Bergerson, MD, MPH13, Yu Zhang, PhD14, Alejandra Prat, MD15, Monserrat Buendia Arellano, PhD16, Angela Deyà-Martinez, MD, PhD6, Rebeca Perez De Diego, PhD17, Helen Matthews, RN18, Tom DiMaggio, RN19, Kelly Stone, MD, PhD20, Joshua Milner, MD21, Helen Su, MD, PhD22, Alexandra Freeman, MD23, V. Koneti Rao, MD24, Jonathan Lyons, MD25

Autosomal recessive hypomorphic mutations in PGM3 have been described to result most commonly in either hyper-IgE or severe combined immunodeficiency (SCID) clinical phenotypes in humans, with one report of an individual with combined immunodeficiency without atopy. Herein, we describe a series of individuals newly diagnosed with PGM3 deficiency functionally confirmed using lectin-based flow cytometric analysis of peripheral blood mononuclear cells, that broadens the associated clinical phenotypes to confirm CID without atopy and childhood Evans syndrome. In addition, we present 3 new disease-causing PGM3 variants, and functionally confirm the pathogenicity of a fourth (p.I350T).

Cases 1.1 and 1.2 identify 2 sisters of Spanish descent with a classical hyper-IgE phenotype. The younger sibling demonstrated severe atopic dermatitis, mild-moderate asthma, multiple food allergies, one episode of ITP, and ADHD. The older sibling demonstrated atopic dermatitis, skin infections, and C. albicans otomastoiditis. The siblings were found to have the damaging compound heterozygous variants p.T492I and p.Q506X in PGM3. Case 2 is a 15 year-old Guatemalan boy with prominent atopy including asthma, allergic rhinitis, food allergy, elevated IgE, atopic dermatitis, as well as oral HSV who was found to be homozygous for the damaging PGM3 variant p.I350T.

Case 3 is a 10-year-old Turkish girl who is the daughter of a consanguineous union. She presented with infantile nephrotic syndrome at 6 months of age, and subsequently developed leukopenia, neutropenia, and low IgG. Complications include bronchiectasis, sinusitis, Pseudomonas urinary tract infection, and inflammatory skin lesions without atopy. She was found to be homozygous for the damaging PGM3 variant p.R69H

Case 4 is a 5-year-old girl from Guatemala. She developed multilineage autoimmune cytopenias including immune thrombocytopenic purpura (ITP), autoimmune hemolytic anemia (AIHA) and autoimmune neutropenia (AIN) at the age of 2 years, refractory to multiple treatments and finally responding to mycophenylate mofetil. She has a history of mild eczema but is without other atopy and suffered from multiple invasive bacterial infections. An additional patient, case 5, was diagnosed with Coombs positive AIHA and ITP at age 3 years refractory to multiple treatments and finally responsive to cyclosporine. Cytopenias recurred 1 year later, resulting in hypoxic brain injury. He died of infectious complications at the age of 7 years. Both patients were found to be homozygous for the damaging PGM3 variant p.I350T.

Discussion This is the first report of PGM3 deficient individuals presenting with Evans syndrome as a primary presentation without additional pathology. While disease-associated mutations appear to cluster around the 4 key conserved domains of the protein, no clear genotype-phenotype correlation is readily observed. In addition to autoimmune cytopenias, PGM3 deficient individuals have also been reported with splenomegaly, lymphoma, and EBV viremia. Thus, in particular for children with lymphoproliferative disease, PGM3 deficiency should also be considered in the differential diagnosis.

Introduction: Meningitis is a life-threatening manifestation of Cryptococcus neoformans (C. neoformans). It occurs in increased frequency in those with impaired cell-mediated immunity, especially those with HIV/AIDS. Infection with C. neoformans has been seen in previously healthy individuals diagnosed with idiopathic CD4 lymphopenia (ICL). ICL is defined by an absolute CD4+ count of less than 300 cells/m3 on multiple occasions, usually 2 to 3 months apart, without other apparent cause such as HIV infection, immunodeficiency, or immunosuppressive medications.

Case Description: Our patient is a previously healthy 50-year-old female with Cryptococcus meningitis and fungemia. Her course was complicated by elevated intracranial pressure requiring extraventricular drain. She was treated with amphotericin and flucytosine for 1 month. Notably, the patient was also found to have Moraxella catarrhalis (M. catarrhalis) bacteremia without identifiable source. She denied history of environmental risk factors, was not up to date on cancer screening, and recently returned from a trip to Italy. Initial evaluation revealed lymphopenia (422 cells/uL), low CD3+ (283 cells/uL), CD4+ cells (42 cells/uL), and CD16/56+ (31 cells/uL), but normal CD8+ (234 cells/uL) and CD19+ cells (121 cells/uL). HIV, ANA, leukemia/lymphoma flow cytometry panel was negative. She also had a normal lymphocyte proliferative responses to PHA (66.7%), normal CD45RA:RO, and protective tetanus titers (2.31 IU/mL), but only 1/23 protective pneumococcal serotypes. Initial immunoglobulins demonstrated slightly low IgG (616 mg/dL). Laboratory studies 2 months after presentation demonstrated improved lymphopenia (800 cells/uL) continued low CD4+ cells (86 cells/uL), but normalized IgG levels (645 mg/dL). Follow-up labs also demonstrated decreased CD19+ B cells (44 cells/uL) and insufficient response to polysaccharide vaccine (9/23 pneumococcal serotypes). Three months after discharge, she is continued on daily fluconazole without recurrence of infections although she still has diplopia and headache.

Discussion: In a review of cryptococcosis in 53 patients with ICL, 7 of them had cryptococcal infection in both the CNS and blood. Of these 7 patients, 1 was cured, 2 improved, 3 relapsed and then improved, and 1 died. Three of these patients were treated with amphotericin and flucytosine. Five of these patients had underlying disease and 3 had notable infections with VZV, TB, or HPV, however other infections such as M. catarrhalis were not mentioned. M. catarrhalis bacteremia has been described in children with underlying immune dysfunction and respiratory infection as well as secondary to pneumonia with M. catarrhalis. In 24 cases of M. catarrhalis bacteremia in adults, most had underlying malignancy and/or neutropenia, predisposing respiratory factors, or source for infection.

Conclusion: This report of C. neoformans meningitis and M. catarrhalis bacteremia in the setting of ICL is unusual in that to our knowledge, M. catarrhalis bacteremia has not been reported in ICL. Cases like this also raise the question as to whether some laboratory abnormalities are secondary to infection, treatment, or underlying disease. It is important to report these cases with ICL in order to group disease phenotypes, as continued monitoring and data collection of these cases may lead to discovery of new disease processes.

Cytokines play critical roles in regulating the development, survival, differentiation and effector function of immune cells. Cytokines exert their function by binding specific receptors on the surface of immune cells and typically activating intracellular JAK/STAT signaling pathways, resulting in induction of specific transcription factors and regulated expression of target genes. In order to differentiate into an appropriate effector fate, lymphocytes need to integrate multiple signals often provided concomitantly by numerous cytokines that activate shared transcription factors. How these signals are balanced and regulated to yield the optimal class of immune response remains to be completely determined. Inborn errors of immunity, or primary immunodeficiencies (PIDs), result from germline mutations in defined genes, leading to loss-of expression, loss-of function, or gain-of function of the encoded protein. PIDs are characterised by defects in immune cell development, or their differentiation into effector cells during immune responses, thereby rendering patients not only highly susceptible to infectious diseases, but also autoimmunity, autoinflammation, allergy and cancer. PIDs are thus an unprecedented model to link defined monogenic defects to immune dysregulation in clinical settings. Indeed, PIDs have unequivocally revealed non-redundant roles of single genes, molecules, signaling pathways and lymphocyte subsets in host defense and immune regulation, and formed the basis of better therapies for immunopathologies. Our indepth analysis of inborn errors of immunity of cytokine signalling pathways have identified fundamental requirements for generating long-lived humoral immune responses in humans. Here, I will present data relating to our recent studies of how inactivating mutations in IL21R, IL6R, ZNF341, STAT1, STAT3, and STAT5, disrupt or dysregulate the generation and function of human memory B cells and Tfh cells, thereby precipitating humoral immunity, as well as allergic disease and autoimmunity.

Introduction: Flow cytometry is a powerful diagnostic tool for detecting hematologic malignancies in a variety of patient specimens including body fluids and lymph node aspirates. Cytopathologists are frequently confronted with lymphocyte –rich effusions, and the definite decision of whether the lymphocytosis is of a purely reactive nature or a presentation of an indolent lymphoma may be an extremely difficult based on microscopy alone. Moreover, small proportions of malignant cells that may be missed out by routine morphology can be detected by flow cytometry.

Methods: Body fluids and FNA specimens simultaneously obtained for FCI, cytologic analysis and Real time PCR from 30 patients were submitted to our flow cytometry laboratory from January 2017 to September 2019. The samples studied were 16 body fluids ( 11 pleural fluids and 5 ascitic fluids) and 14 FNA samples (13 enlarged lymph nodes and 1 lung mass).Four color FCI method was performed and the following fluorescent monoclonal antibodies were used: CD45, CD19, CD5, CD20, CD22, CD23, CD79b, FMC7, Kappa and Lambda light chains, CD200, CD123, CD10, CD11c, CD2, CD1a, CD3, CD5, CD7, CD4, CD8, TdT, CD52, CD25, CD30, CD40, CD56, CD95, BCL2, CD34. FCI analysis was performed on a Beckman coulter cytomics FC500 flow cytometer using software CXP to analyze data. The cases were diagnosed as leukemia or lymphoma as per the World Health Organization (WHO) 2008 guideline. Real time PCR was done for detecting Mycobacterium tuberculosis (MTB) DNA to exclude tuberculosis.

Results: Among 30 cases 27(90%) showed immunophenotype positivity for malignancy, of which 25/27(83.33%) were hematologic malignancies and 2/27(6.67%) other malignancies. MTB DNA was positive in 3/30(10%) cases. Pleural fluid (n=11) samples were positive for diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) (4 cases), angioimmunoblastic T-cell lymphoma (4 cases), T-lymphoblastic lymphoma (1 case), thymoma (1case), tuberculosis (1 case). Ascitic fluid (n=5) samples showed positivity for angioimmunoblastic T-cell lymphoma (4 cases) and DLBCL (1 case). FNA of lymph nodes (n=13) were positive forT-lymphoblastic lymphoma (2cases), angioimmunoblastic T-cell lymphoma (2 cases), DLBCL (3 cases), Hodgkin lymphoma (1case), nodular lymphocyte predominant Hodgkin lymphoma (1 case), peripheral T-cell lymphoma (NOS) (1 case), splenic B-cell marginal zone lymphoma(1 case), tuberculosis (2 cases). One FNA of lung mass were tumor of neural cell origin. Both immunophenotype and cytomorphology positive for malignancy were in 19/30(63.33%) cases.Cytomorphology was negative/ suspicious in 11/30(36.67%) cases, of which both cytomorphology and immunophenotype negative were 3(10%) and cytomorphology negative but immunophenotype positive cases were 8(26.67%). MTB DNA was detected in pleural fluid in 1 case and FNA sample in 2 cases.

Conclusion: Multiparametric flow cytometry by using comprehensive panel of monoclonal antibodies is a useful diagnostic test to evaluate body fluids or FNA as it can demonstrate small malignant populations that may be missed out by routine cytomorphology.

4Technical assistant/St. Anna Children's Hospital and Children's Cancer Research Institute, Department of Pediatrics, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna; Ludwig Boltzmann Institute for Rare and Undiagnosed Diseases, Vienna; CeMM Research Centre for Molecular Medicine of the Austrian Academy of Sciences, Vienna, Austria

5Director LBI-RUD/St. Anna Children's Hospital and Children's Cancer Research Institute, Department of Pediatrics, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna; Ludwig Boltzmann Institute for Rare and Undiagnosed Diseases, Vienna; CeMM Research Centre for Molecular Medicine of the Austrian Academy of Sciences, Vienna, Austria; Department of Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria

7PhD student/St. Anna Children's Hospital and Children's Cancer Research Institute, Department of Pediatrics, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna; Ludwig Boltzmann Institute for Rare and Undiagnosed Diseases, Vienna; CeMM Research Centre for Molecular Medicine of the Austrian Academy of Sciences, Vienna, Austria

8Bioinformatics Lead for Personalised Medicine/St. Anna Children's Hospital and Children's Cancer Research Institute, Department of Pediatrics, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna; Ludwig Boltzmann Institute for Rare and Undiagnosed Diseases, Vienna; CeMM Research Centre for Molecular Medicine of the Austrian Academy of Sciences, Vienna, Austria

The phenotypes of primary antibody deficient (PAD) patients range from milder (e.g. specific antibody deficiency) to severe (e.g. X-linked agammaglobulinemia) deficiency of the immune system. PAD patients form a clinically, immunologically as well as genetically heterogeneous group. Often, the genetic background has not been elucidated; it probably is not monogenetic in a large subgroup of patients. PAD patients suffer most frequently from recurrent bacterial infections of the respiratory or gastrointestinal tract due to immune deficiency, but may also have varying degrees of autoimmune and lymphoproliferative comorbidities due to immune dysregulation.

Unfortunately, a standardized description of PAD phenotypes is lacking rendering robust definitions of PAD-subtype diagnoses, including CVID, difficult. This impairs the formation of homogeneous cohorts that can form the starting point for future clinical and genetic research.

The PAD subgroup of the Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) immune mediated disorders consortium supported by ERN RITA and ESID is addressing the gaps in standardized phenotypic description of PADs. Using the HPO dataset, literature mining, and ESID, IUIS and OMIM classifications, we aimed to re-evaluate and complete the PAD-related HPO terms to allow efficient data exchange and matching of phenotypically similar PAD patients.

As a principle, it was decided to avoid the ongoing variance in PAD-subtype definitions and to build the PAD-related HPO tree based as much as possible on unambiguously interpretable items. ‘Hypogammaglobulinemia’ was deleted as HPO term, and replaced by separate HPO terms such as ‘decreased total IgG in blood’, subdivided in ‘transient’ vs. ‘chronic’, and ‘(near) absent’ vs. ‘partially decreased’ (the same for IgG1, IgG2, IgG3, IgG4, IgA and IgM). ‘Decreased specific antibody level in blood’ was specified further into ‘decreased natural antibody level to blood group antigens in blood’, subdivided in ‘(near) complete’ vs. ‘partial’ absence (the same for protein, polysaccharide and protein-conjugated polysaccharide vaccination). Relevant HPO terms related to infection and to specific organ manifestations like bronchiectasis, autoimmunity and lymphoproliferation were re-evaluated and completed, and will be linked to PAD diseases in the HPO online system by the PAD subgroup experts.

Acceptance and widespread use of this PAD-related HPO tree for standardized phenotyping will be essential to empower future multicenter clinical research and related genetic discoveries as well as support clinicians in diagnosing PAD through the linkage of HPO terms to PAD disease entities.

8Director, Division of Intramural Research; Chief, Immunopathogenesis Section/Laboratory of Clinical Immunology and Microbiology (LCIM), Division of Intramural Research (DIR), National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID), National Institutes of Health (NIH), Bethesda, MD, USA

Leukocyte adhesion deficiency type 1 (LAD1) is an autosomal recessive disorder characterized by the inability of granulocytes to emigrate from the bloodstream to sites of inflammation. LAD1 is caused by mutations in the ITGB2 gene (21q22.3), encoding the beta-2-integrin, CD18, which is essential for firm adhesion of leukocytes to the endothelium. In LAD1 survival is compromised, morbidity from inflammatory lesions is high, and treatment is poor. The moderate form of LAD1 is often managed with antibiotics for prophylaxis and during acute infections. After infancy severe gingivitis and chronic periodontitis are universal. Periodontal findings affect primary and permanent teeth, causing intense oral mucosal (gingival) inflammation and destruction of tooth supporting bone, which are hallmarks of the disease periodontitis.

Blocking the IL-23/IL 17 cytokines, which are up regulated in LAD1 gingiva, can reduce bacterial load and resolve inflammatory gingivitis. Ustekinumab binds to the shared p40 subunit of human IL-12 and IL-23, cytokines that modulate lymphocyte function, including T helper (TH) 1 cells and TH17 subsets, thereby blocking them.

Two patients showed improvement in chronic periodontitis and a substantial decrease in oral ulcers while on ustekinumab. No clear safety signals were seen. Durability of these findings is still unknown. Ustekinumab in LAD1deficiency appears to be safe and potentially effective.

Introduction: primary immunodeficiencies with dysregulation associate defects in the immune homeostasis leading to inappropriate immune response (lack or excess) that causes autoimmunity, allergy and/or inflammation. Impairment of different subsets of T and B compartments may be associated with these PIDs.

Aim: 1) Describe T and B memory compartment of 18 PID patients (pts) with dysregulation: 1 CD25 deficiency, 3 STAT1 GOF, 1 STAT5b deficiency, 4 CTLA4 variant, 2 PI3KCD variant and 6 CVID-like (with no molecular defect) and compare them with a group of healthy donors (HD). 2) Associate cTfh profile with B cell compartment impairment.

Results: 1) Pts showed a significant decrease of Naïve CD4+ T cells (CD45RA+CD27+) (52,2% vs 17,6%) (p < 0.0001) with expanded central memory T cells (CD45RA-CD27+) (32.8% vs 60.8%) (p < 0.0001); CD4+ T cells had higher levels of activation markers (CD4+HLA-DR+) (6,1%vs 27,4%) (p < 0,0001). Pts showed a significant increase of circulating follicular T cells (cTfh) (CD45RA-CXCR5+) compared with HD (mean 30,5% vs 11,6%) (p < 0,0001) with PD-1 overexpression (p < 0.0001). STAT1 GOF, CTLA4, PI3KCD and CVID-like pts showed a skew towards cTfh1 (CXCR3+). Regulatory T cells (CD4+CD25++FOXP3+) were absent in CD25 and STAT5b deficiency and decreased in the other pts. Within CD8+ cells, although effector memory (CD45RA-CD27-) (p < 0.002), TEMRA (CD45RA+CD27-) (p < 0.009) and HLA-DR+ CD8+ (p < 0.002) subsets showed a significant increase compared with HD, the behaviour was variable between different mutations. Regarding B cell compartment, pts with STAT1GOF, PI3KCD and CVID-like showed a severe impairment of switched-memory B cells (Sw-MBL) (CD27+IgD-IgM-); the STAT5b deficient patient had increased frequencies of this subset, while CTLA4 pts had a variable B defect. 2) lower Sw-MBL values were significantly associated with lower values of cTfh17 cells (p < 0.007) (r=0.6975). CD21low B cells were exclusively high in CVID-like pts, and transitional B cells were increase in PI3KCD and almost all CVID-like pts.

Discussion: In summary, patients with dysregulatory syndromes associate a defect of T and B homeostasis (survival, activation and differentiation). Specific mutations can differentially affect the quantity and/or the quality of cTfh. There is a strict association between the differentiations of Tfh with TH17 profile with the generation of Sw-MBL. These alterations may play a role in the pathophysiology of primary immunodeficiencies with B lymphocyte functional impairment. Immune monitoring of lymphocyte subsets of patient with dysregulation may approach to the diagnosis of specific monogenic mutations.

Emma WestermannClark, MD1, Rachel Cruz, BS2, Sumai Gordon, B.S3, Cristina Meehan, BS4, Krisztian Csomos, PhD5, Boglarka Ujhazi, MS6, Ernest Amankwah, PhD7, Panida Sriaroon, MD8, Jonathan Metts, MD9, Marisol Betensky, MD9, Irmel Ayala, MD9, Jolan Walter, MD, PhD10

Objective: The purpose of this study is to increase awareness and improve diagnosis of primary immune deficiency (PID) in the heterogenous group of patients with autoimmune cytopenia (AIC) by identifying clinical characteristics and laboratory biomarkers that distinguish those with underlying PID, disease activity and guide mechanism-based targeted therapy.

Methods: Patients with AIC (autoimmune hemolytic anemia (AIHA), immune thrombocytopenia (ITP), or autoimmune neutropenia (AIN)) were referred to our Immune Dysregulation team and prospectively enrolled during 2016-2019. Detailed immune phenotyping (IgG, IgA, IgM, lymphocyte subsets, vaccine titers, lymphocyte proliferation to mitogens/antigens), serum lipopolysaccharide (seLPS) and autoantibodies were measured and/or collected by chart review and genetic testing for PID was pursued.

Results: From 2016 to 2019, 93 patients were enrolled; two subjects were removed due to parental request or lack of AIC diagnosis. Of the 91 remaining patients, 43 (46%) were classified as “AIC-PID” based on genetic testing and/or immune phenotyping; 41 (45%) were classified as AIC-only, and 7 (9%) were asymptomatic family controls. The patients were predominantly children (ages 1-82 years, average age 17.3 years); 47% (44/93) were male. Among patients who have had genetic testing to date (n=66)(72%), pathogenic genetic mutations were confirmed in 23/66 (35%) of patients. Mutations include FAS/FASL (n=8, including 3 family members without AIC), CTLA4 (n=4), 22q11 (n=4), and one patient each with NFKB1, WAS, POLE-1, PI3K, CASP10, CARD11, and CGD; the remainder of AIC-PID patients were classified as combined immune deficiency or common variable immune deficiency based on immune phenotyping. Lymphocyte subsets (CD4+T, CD8+T, CD19+B, CD56+NK) and immune globulins (IgG, IgA, IgM) tended to be lower in AIC-PID patients vs AIC-only (p < 0.05). Evans syndrome was more common in AIC-PID patients (13/43, 30%) compared to AIC-only (4/41, 10%). LPS was elevated in the serum of AIC patients compared to healthy controls (mean 719 vs 87 pg/mL, p < 0.001). Excluding partial DiGeorge syndrome patients (average LPS 222pg/mL), seLPS levels were significantly higher in genetically-defined untreated PID patients (average 1463 pg/mL) vs. other PID (average 444 pg/mL)(p=0.02) or patients with AIC alone (average 667 pg/mL)(p=0.03). Studies are ongoing on specific subsets that are linked to immune dysregulation (switched memory B cells, T-regulatory cells, double negative T cells, T follicular helper cells) and the use of soluble IL-2 as a biomarker of disease activity.

Conclusions: A high fraction of AIC patient were identified with underlying PID in our study. Basic immune evaluation with immunoglobulin levels and lymphocyte subsets expedited diagnosis of PID. Genetic evaluation distinguished a group of patients with AIC-PID and highly elevated LPS level, reflecting high bacterial load, which may distinguish them from the rest the AIC cohort. The source of bacterial LPS can be multifactorial and is yet to be determined. Our studies continue focusing on biomarkers that can be applied to the heterogenous group of patients with AIC. This will allow early detection and timely initiation of targeted therapies.

Introduction/Background: Autoimmune-Polyendocrinopathy-Candidiasis-Ectodermal Dystrophy (APECED) is a monogenic autoimmune disease resulting from biallelic mutations in the AIRE gene. Although typically characterized by the classic triad of chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis, hypoparathyroidism and adrenal insufficiency, we recently reported that the clinical spectrum of the syndrome is far broader and that incorporation of an adjunct triad of APECED rash, intestinal dysfunction, and enamel hypoplasia in the classic triad could lead to earlier diagnosis (Ferre et al., JCI Insight, 2016). Among the adjunct triad manifestations, APECED rash occurs in 66% of American APECED patients by age 3, most often developing in the first year of life.

Results: A 10-month-old girl with a family history of genetically confirmed APECED in her 13-year old sister developed discrete circular, maculopapular erythematous lesions on her torso that spread to the face, arms, and legs while sparing the palms and soles. The rash was partially blanching, non-painful and non-pruritic and was preceded by low-grade fever (38□C) without other accompanying symptoms. She had not received medications or vaccinations prior to the rash onset. The lesions increased in size with associated central clearing and resolved 2.5 months after onset. The rash recurred with similar appearance 10 times over 14 months with each recurrence lasting between 10 days and 2.5 months. As with the first rash episode, recurrences were often preceded by fever (38-39□C) without accompanying symptoms or inciting factors. Neither topical nor oral antihistamines improved the rash.

AIRE sequencing identified the same compound heterozygous mutations (c.967_979del13 and c.769C>T) that the sister has. High titers of interferon-□ autoantibodies were measured in serum. Skin biopsy revealed superficial perivascular chronic inflammation and intraepidermal lymphocytes composed predominantly of mixed CD4 and CD8 T lymphocytes with few perivascular B lymphocytes. No eosinophils or vasculitis was observed. Myeloperoxidase immunostaining revealed extensive karyorrhexis. Laboratory studies revealed normal white count and ESR, negative anti-IgE receptor antibody, and positive anti-IgE antibody.

At 22 months, she developed oral candidiasis as second manifestation of APECED, thus reaching a diagnostic dyad when applying our proposed expanded diagnostic criteria. She has not developed hypoparathyroidism or adrenal insufficiency; thus, she has not yet reached a classic diagnostic dyad. Systematic screening for these endocrinopathies will be needed to avoid life-threatening complications of acute endocrine failure.

Conclusions: We report the clinical and histologic features of APECED rash manifesting as the first disease component of APECED in a 10-month old girl. APECED should be considered in the differential diagnosis of recurrent erythematous maculopapular urticaria-like eruptions characterized by mixed lymphocytic and neutrophilic infiltration unresponsive to antihistamines. Our case illustrates the clinical utility of incorporating the expanded diagnostic criteria of APECED rash, enamel hypoplasia and intestinal dysfunction into the classic diagnostic triad, which can lead to earlier APECED diagnosis.

Patient is a 22 yo with h/o Hyper IgM Syndrome (hemizygous frameshift mutation in CD40L gene, c189delT) recently transitioned from the Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia (CHOP) to the Hospital of the University of Pennsylvania (HUP) who presented with prolonged severe neutropenia despite G-CSF and seven hospitalizations for febrile neutropenia in the span of ten months. Prior to his neutropenia, patient was on monthly IVIG, with IgG trough 700-900 in the past year. He was evaluated for BMT in 2015 but declined.

Patient was first found to be neutropenic in Aug 2017 when he was admitted with Pseudomonas thigh abscess, HSV stomatitis and rhinovirus infection. He was treated with broad-spectrum antibiotics with improvement in neutropenia. The following month, he was hospitalized again with neutropenic fever, left axilla Pseudomonas abscess and rhinovirus infection. He underwent bone marrow biopsy revealing left shifted myeloids with decreased maturing forms and T cell predominant lymphoid aggregates, suggestive of autoimmune neutropenia vs. hyper IgM syndrome associated with neutropenia. Anti-neutrophils antibodies were negative. He was then admitted the following month (10/2017) with febrile neutropenia with CXR concerning for viral pneumonitis vs. atypical pneumonia. He was started on G-CSF therapy with significant initial response in ANC. However, this response was short-lived as he was again admitted in 12/2017 with febrile neutropenia and upper respiratory rhinovirus infection. He was continued on daily G-CSF.

Due to persistently normal ANC for approximately three weeks, he was weaned off G-CSF in 1/2018. In 3/2018 and 4/2018, he had two more hospitalizations for febrile neutropenia. G-CSF was restarted with dose uptitrated to 8mcg/kg during his hospitalization in April. He was found to be thrombocytopenic with splenomegaly on abdominal ultrasound. Anti-platelet antibodies and repeat anti neutrophil antibodies were not detected. He was discharged with close follow up with Immunology and Hematology. Due to his age, he was transitioned to Penn Allergy/Immunology in 4/2018. There was close communication between CHOP Allergy/Immunology, CHOP Hematology and Penn Allergy/Immunology during this transition period.

Patient was admitted to HUP in 5/2018 with febrile neutropenia (despite higher dose of G-CSF), rhinovirus infection, Pseudomonas sinusitis and CT chest findings suggestive of possible fungal pneumonia. Due to persistent neutropenia refractory to G-CSF treatment, Hematology was consulted and repeat bone marrow biopsy showed hypercellular bone marrow with markedly left shifted granulocytic hyperplasia, compatible with G-CSF therapy. Flow cytometry showed no evidence of plasma cell neoplasm. Dose of IVIG was adjusted and increased based on his weight. Per hematology, he also received an additional high dose IVIG 1g/kg x 2 days for presumed immune mediated neutropenia with immediate increase in ANC. Despite ANC of 0 for 8 days, an additional 1g/kg of IVIG improved his ANC to >1000 within 12 hours of his first dose. Thrombocytopenia also improved to normal range. Since then, patient has been on monthly 500-600mg/kg IVIG with no recurrence in neutropenia. This patient’s prolonged persistent neutropenia with immediate response to high dose IVIG is suggestive of autoimmune neutropenia, which should be taken into consideration in Hyper IgM patients with persistent neutropenia.

Background: Children with DiGeorge Anomaly (DGA) represent a heterogenous group, often classified as either partial DGA (pDGA) or complete DGA (cDGA) based upon the degree of thymic hypoplasia. This paucity of T-cell parameters and function has serious implications for infection risk, autoimmunity, and malignancy. However, there are limited studies stratifying children with DGA by these subgroups, especially in regard to immune function and subsequent infection risk.

Study design: Single-center, retrospective cohort analysis evaluating the relationship between pDGA and cDGA to infection risk with particular focus on infection-related hospitalization, pathogenic organism identification, and antimicrobial resistance profiles. The source population includes all pediatric patients < 18 years of age diagnosed with either pDGA or cDGA while receiving care at Duke University from January 1, 2014 to June 30, 2019. The final analysis sample included 145 patients.

Methods: To evaluate the differences in immune function between DGA subgroups, we will report the proportion of low ( < 10th percentile for age) T cell immune biomarkers for both subgroups and compare populations using a chi-squared test. To compare per year incidence of infection-related hospitalization for DGA subgroups, a Poisson model with number of hospitalizations per patient as the outcome, an offset equal to the time at risk for hospitalization, and either pDGA or cDGA diagnosis as the exposure will be used. Models will be bivariate. We will report an incidence rate ratio (IRR) and 95% confidence interval (95% CI). To evaluate the impact of cellular and humoral immune function on infection-related hospitalization, we will use Poisson models where the outcome is the number of hospitalizations per patient, an offset equal to the time at risk for hospitalization, and low immune biomarker as the exposure. All models will be bivariate. We will report an IRR and 95% CI. Infection type and resistance profiles will be completely descriptive.

Results: As expected, children with cDGA had a significantly higher probability of a low ( < 10th percentile for age) values for total T cells (CD3+), helper T cells (CD3+CD4+), cytotoxic T cells (CD3+CD8+), and naïve helper T-cells (CD4+CD45RA+CD62L+) as well as a significantly lower probability of low pan memory T-cells (CD3+CD45RO+) compared to children with pDGA. No differences were detected in the percentage of low natural killer (NK) cells (CD15+CD56+) or B cells (CD19+) between subgroups. cDGA patients had a significantly higher incidence of hospitalization per year (1.52 (0.61, 3.80)) compared to pDGA patients (0.20 (0.12, 0.32)). The IRR is 7.62 (2.71, 21.3). Across both subgroups, the incidence of hospitalization was higher in DGA patients who had low helper and naïve T-cells. There is ongoing analysis into hospital-related infection and resistance profiles. Notable frequencies include bacteremia ( > 5%), invasive viral disease ( > 1%), and opportunistic infections ( > 1%).

Conclusions: Children who had cDGA were 662% more likely to have an infection requiring hospitalization than children who had pDGA, emphasizing the need for thymus transplant for cDGA. Further analysis of infection type and patient outcomes is critical to enhancing management of this unique patient population.

Antibody cross-reactivity among flavivirus has been documented. In recent times Zika virus has been emerging in pockets of the mosquito-infested regions, While Southwestern Saudi Arabia is known for Arthropod-borne viral diseases and we do not know the incidence or even presence of Zika virus in this region. It is restricted to predict the IgM and IgG antibody detection ranges owing to limited data and colossal cross-reactivity among the Zika and other flaviviruses. We tested sera from 217 pregnant women irrespective of their clinical presentation for Zika and Dengue IgM, IgG respectively. The Zika positive samples were further confirmed by Plaque reduction neutralization tests (PRNT). From our results, 3.6% (8) cases were positive for ZIKA IgM against 1.8 % (4) positivity to IgG. When these samples were assessed for Dengue IgM and IgG, we observed 1.3% (3) seropositivity for IgM and IgG respectively. There was no single sample positive for both IgM and IgG of Zika or Dengue. However, we observed one sample positive for both Zika and Dengue IgM. Upon mapping the overlapping serotiters, there was no significant correlation observed between the Dengue IgM and IgG. Whereas Zika IgG positive sample showed high serotiter for Dengue IgG indicating the contribution of cross-reactivity for observed Zika positivity. Screening for the incidence of Zika, therefore, becomes particularly hard in a population that has the presence of pre-exposure of Dengue and this cross-reactivity makes it hard to determine the Zika incubation and antibody prevalence confounded with other flaviviruses.

INTRODUCTION Humoral PID diagnostic protocol includes the analysis of the immune response to different protein and polysaccharide antigens (Ags)(1). Although the analysis of the immune response against the polysaccharides vaccine from Pneumococca has been the standard method, the use of S. Typhim Vi vaccine has appeared as a good alternative (2). In this report we show the results obtained with the use of S.Typhim Vi in 27 adults patients attending the PID outpatient clinic.

MATERIAL AND METHODS Patients with humoral-suspected PIDs were challenged with Typhoid polysaccharide vaccine (Typhim Vi®; Sanofi-Pasteur). Serum was obtained on basal and after 4 weeks of vaccination. Specific IgG levels against S.typhim were measured using “VaccZyme TM Human Anti-Salmonella typhi Vi IgG Enzyme Immunoassay Kit” (Binding-Site).

RESULTS A total of 90 Adult patients attended the PID clinics during Nov 2018-Nov 2019. From those, 27 patients were fully evaluated using a Humoral-Suspected PID algorithm that includes the S.Typhi vaccination. In total 13 male and 14 female patients completed the protocol and were analyzed. Twenty patients were considered as responders (ratio pre/post >3x) whereas 7 patients were non-responders.

DISCUSSION The main advantage of assessing polysaccharide immune response using S.tyhpim is the usual lack of specific IgG at the moment of the initial evaluation. In this serie, just one patient has a high basal level (#2-vaccinated in the past). Thirteen patients had basal levels below the detection limit of the test (7,4U/mL) and 13 patients between 7,4 and 23,35U/mL, that has been described as a cut otf level for non-immunised individuals (personal experience,3,4).

Regarding the polysaccharide immune response as a tool to distinguish PID vs non-PID patients, the results showed a good correlation between those non-responders with more clinical relevant PID diagnostics. Seven non-responders patients were subsequently diagnosed with a primary (* on Table I) and/or secondary ID (** on Table I). Despite this, there were 16 patients that we could have classified as Strong Responders (ratio >3x, absolute specific IgG post-vaccination level >100U/mL) and 4 patients considered as Weak Responders (ratio Post/Pre >3x, absolute specific IgG post-vaccination level < 100U/mL).

Strong responders were considered non-PID after including other clinical investigations and laboratory tests (Cell subpopulation study, PCP response) whereas weak responders group consisted in some “minor” forms of PID, like isolated IgM or Ig subclasses deficits. More patients are needed to confirm this functional classification of PID patients regarding their S.Typhi immune response.