Author contributions: C.L.M., C.S.G., A.C.H., and V.L.M. designed research; C.L.M., L.M., and V.L.M. performed research; J.C.R., T.D.O., and A.C.H. contributed new reagents/analytic tools; C.L.M., L.M., T.D.O., and V.L.M. analyzed data; and C.L.M. and V.L.M. wrote the paper.

γδ T cells reside in barrier tissues and provide immune protection against infection and cancer. Their antitumor potential has led to recent advances in the development of γδ T cell immunotherapy. However, our understanding of the basic biology of these cells, including which molecules and pathways control their maintenance within barrier tissues, remains poor. We demonstrate that β2 integrin adhesion molecules play a major role in regulating γδ T cell subset numbers during homeostasis: the loss of β2 integrin expression results in a striking increase in IL-17–producing γδ T cells in the lungs and uterus due to enhanced survival. These findings illustrate a mechanism of γδ T cell regulation that may have significant implications for immunotherapy development.

The γδ T cells reside predominantly at barrier sites and play essential roles in immune protection against infection and cancer. Despite recent advances in the development of γδ T cell immunotherapy, our understanding of the basic biology of these cells, including how their numbers are regulated in vivo, remains poor. This is particularly true for tissue-resident γδ T cells. We have identified the β2 family of integrins as regulators of γδ T cells. β2-integrin–deficient mice displayed a striking increase in numbers of IL-17–producing Vγ6Vδ1+ γδ T cells in the lungs, uterus, and circulation. Thymic development of this population was normal. However, single-cell RNA sequencing revealed the enrichment of genes associated with T cell survival and proliferation specifically in β2-integrin–deficient IL-17+ cells compared to their wild-type counterparts. Indeed, β2-integrin–deficient Vγ6+ cells from the lungs showed reduced apoptosis ex vivo, suggesting that increased survival contributes to the accumulation of these cells in β2-integrin–deficient tissues. Furthermore, our data revealed an unexpected role for β2 integrins in promoting the thymic development of the IFNγ-producing CD27+ Vγ4+ γδ T cell subset. Together, our data reveal that β2 integrins are important regulators of γδ T cell homeostasis, inhibiting the survival of IL-17–producing Vγ6Vδ1+ cells and promoting the thymic development of the IFNγ-producing Vγ4+ subset. Our study introduces unprecedented mechanisms of control for γδ T cell subsets.