Tissue regeneration is a multi-step process mediated by diverse cellular hierarchies and states that are also implicated in tissue dysfunction and pathogenesis. Here we leveraged single-cell RNA sequencing in combination with in vivo lineage tracing and organoid models to finely map the trajectories of alveolar-lineage cells during injury repair and lung regeneration. We identified a distinct AT2-lineage population, damage-associated transient progenitors (DATPs), that arises during alveolar regeneration. We found that interstitial macrophage-derived IL-1β primes a subset of AT2 cells expressing Il1r1 for conversion into DATPs via a HIF1α-mediated glycolysis pathway, which is required for mature AT1 cell differentiation. Importantly, chronic inflammation mediated by IL-1β prevents AT1 differentiation, leading to aberrant accumulation of DATPs and impaired alveolar regeneration. Together, this stepwise mapping to cell fate transitions shows how an inflammatory niche controls alveolar regeneration by controlling stem cell fate and behavior.

Choi et al. show that inflammatory signals play a crucial role during alveolar regeneration after injury. They define stepwise differentiation trajectories for AT2 cells into AT1 cells via damage-associated transient progenitors (DATPs) and find that unresolved inflammation stalls transition of DATPs into mature AT1 cells.

Maintenance of tissue homeostasis and repair following injury relies on the function of adult stem cells (Hogan et al., 2014; Li and Clevers, 2010; Wagers and Weissman, 2004). In the lungs, barrier integrity of the epithelium is essential for protection against infection and efficient gas exchange. Lung tissue has slow cell turnover at steady state but harbors region-specific stem cells that quickly mobilize after tissue injury to replenish the epithelium (Hogan et al., 2014). In the alveoli, alveolar type 2 (AT2) cells maintain lung homeostasis and enable regeneration after injury by proliferating and differentiating into new alveolar type 1 (AT1) cells specialized for gas exchange (Adamson and Bowden, 1974; Barkauskas et al., 2013; Rock et al., 2011). Given the importance of AT2 cells, their self-renewal and differentiation must be tightly coordinated to maintain tissue integrity and efficient repair. Disruption of this balance can lead to life-threatening lung diseases (Hogan et al., 2014; Kotton and Morrisey, 2014). Recent studies have begun to suggest signaling pathways involved in regulation of proliferation and differentiation of AT2 cells (Finn et al., 2019; Riemondy et al., 2019). However, it remains unclear which factors driven by injury trigger activation of quiescent AT2 cells to differentiate toward the AT1 cell fate and which differentiation trajectory they follow during lung regeneration.

Tissue repair is a complex process that involves dynamic crosstalk between stem cells and their respective niches. Physiological insults, such as a viral infection, are well known to instigate inflammation by triggering activation or recruitment of immune cells to the affected tissue site (Medzhitov, 2008). In solid tissues, diverse immune cells of innate or adaptive immunity are even integral components of the niche, where they contribute to immune defense against infection and can sense environmental stimuli (Naik et al., 2018). Beyond the ability to clear pathogens, recent studies highlight how restoration of barrier integrity in epithelial organs such as the skin, gut, and lung after destruction is critically dependent on the immune system (Hsu et al., 2014; Klose and Artis, 2016; Lindemans et al., 2015; Naik et al., 2017). Lung epithelium is especially vulnerable to injury because its surface is exposed to the external environment. In line with this, immune cells have been reported to be involved in lung homeostasis and restoration (Chen et al., 2012; Lechner et al., 2017; Westphalen et al., 2014). Recent advances have increased our insight into the critical role of paracrine niche-generated signals as key modulators of stem cell behaviors. In the distal lung, Pdgfra+ mesenchymal cells and vascular endothelial cells have been identified as supportive niche cells (Barkauskas et al., 2013; Lee et al., 2014). More recently, mesenchymal cell subtypes, including Wnt-responding and Wnt-producing fibroblasts, have been suggested to regulate stem cell properties and the cellular identity of AT2 cells (Lee et al., 2017; Nabhan et al., 2018; Zepp et al., 2017). However, our knowledge regarding the specific crosstalk between inflammatory cells and AT2 cells in regeneration remains limited. In particular, a fundamental question still to be investigated is how chronic inflammation affects tissue destruction because it is likely caused by impaired stem cell function or regeneration process after injury, processes that are poorly understood.

Here we set out to identify the lineage trajectory from AT2 toward AT1 cells during alveolar regeneration after injury. Single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) analysis of in vivo AT2 lineage-labeled cells and ex vivo AT2 cell-derived organoids allowed us to delineate a precise differentiation trajectory in which AT2 cells adopt a “priming” state followed by transition into damage-associated transition progenitors (DATPs) prior to conversion into terminally differentiated AT1 cells. Importantly, we demonstrate that inflammatory niches driven by IL-1β and Hif1α signaling pathways orchestrate the regeneration process by triggering state-specific differentiation programs of AT2-lineage cells. Overall, our study reveals essential functions of inflammation in alveolar regeneration, providing new insights into how chronic inflammation impairs tissue restoration and leads to lung diseases.

To define molecular identities and states of AT2-lineage cells responding to injury and undergoing regeneration, we treated AT2 reporter mice (SPC-CreERT2;R26RtdTomato) with tamoxifen, exposed them to PBS (control, homeostasis) or bleomycin (injury), and isolated lineage-labeled cells for scRNA-seq analysis on day 14 (acute injury) or 28 (resolution of injury) (Figure 1A; Figure S1A). Based on the expression of canonical AT1 and AT2 cell markers, we uncovered five distinct cell populations (Figure 1B; Figure S1B). Distribution of each cluster across time points allowed us to assess how AT2 cells changed during injury response and repair (Figure 1C).Figure 1scRNA-Seq Reveals a Dynamic Lineage Trajectory from AT2 Cells to AT1 Cells during Alveolar Regeneration after Injury(A) Schematic of the experimental design for SPC lineage-labeled single cell isolation at the indicated time points after bleomycin injury.(B) Clusters of SPC lineage-labeled alveolar cells (12,086) from 10xGenomics 3′ single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) analysis visualized by UMAP and assigned specific colors. The number of cells in the individual cluster is depicted.(C) Distribution of each cluster across the indicated time points after injury.(D) Gene expression of key markers in each distinctive cluster.(E) Network topology among clusters from single-cell data, revealed by partition-based graph abstraction (PAGA). Colors indicate the proportion of each cluster by time point. Each node in the PAGA graph represents a cluster, and the weight of the lines represents the statistical measure of connectivity between clusters.(F) Heatmap of gene expression profiles according to pseudotime trajectory. The lower color bars indicate cell types (top) and actual time (bottom).See also Figure S1.

As expected, lineage-labeled cells in uninjured mice comprised mainly AT2 cells (cluster 1) expressing canonical AT2 markers, such as surfactant proteins (Sftpc and Sftpa1) (Figures 1C and 1D). On day 14 after injury, three additional distinct populations had emerged, whereas this AT2 cluster had become dramatically reduced (Figures 1C and 1D). Approximately 6% of lineage-labeled cells expressed cell cycle markers such as Cdk1, Mki67, and Cenpa, corresponding to cycling AT2 (cAT2) cells (cluster 3) (Figure 1D; Figure S1C). A second AT2-like state was highly prominent at this stage (cluster 2). This cluster showed similar expression levels of canonical AT2 markers, including Sftpc, but lower expression of genes that are involved in the lipid metabolism shown in homeostatic AT2 (hAT2) cells (cluster 1), such as Acly, Hmgcr, and Hmgcs1 (Figure 1D; Figure S1C). We also found enriched expression of genes induced by an inflammatory response, such as Ptges, Lcn1, Orm1, Tmem173, and Ifitm2/3, in this cluster (Figure 1D; Figure S1C; Fortier et al., 2008; Kuriakose and Kanneganti, 2018; Ligresti et al., 2012). Remarkably, essential regulators for AT2 lineage specification, such as Etv5, Abca3, and Cebpa, were also downregulated, suggesting that this population had lost AT2 identity (Figure 1D; Figure S1C; Martis et al., 2006; Rindler et al., 2017; Zhang et al., 2017), suggesting a primed AT2 (pAT2) state. In addition, cluster 2 cells had a transcriptional signature similar to that of cAT2 cells, with the exception of cell cycle-related genes. We also identified an uncharacterized cellular subset of cluster 4, which we named damage-associated transition progenitors (DATPs). DATPs expressed specific markers such as Cldn4, Krt8, Ndrg1, Sprr1a, and AW112010 (Figure 1D; Figure S1C). Overall, DATPs shared features of the AT1-lineage transcription signature but showed much lower expression of canonical AT1 markers, including Pdpn, Hopx, and Cav-1 (Figure 1D; Figure S1C). Analysis of Gene Ontology (GO) terms further revealed that DATPs were characterized by increased expression of genes associated with p53 signaling (e.g., Trp53, Mdm2, Ccnd1, and Gdf15), inhibition of proliferation (e.g., Cdkn1a and Cdkn2a), hypoxia (Hif1a and Ndrg1), and the interferon-gamma signaling pathway (e.g., Ifngr1, Ly6a/Sca-1, Irf7, and Cxcl16) (Figure S1D).

As expected, on day 28 post-injury, we observed substantial increases in the mature AT1 and hAT2 populations, whereas cAT2, pAT2, and DATPs were diminished, reflecting return to alveolar homeostasis after injury (Figure 1C). To better understand the differentiation paths of AT2 cells to AT1 cells during regeneration, we applied partition-based graph abstraction (PAGA; Figure 1E) and characterized transcriptional programs ordered along pseudotemporal trajectories (Figure 1F; Wolf et al., 2019). PAGA shows that AT2 and AT1 cells are connected via a trajectory that includes pAT2 cells and DATPs (Figure 1E). cAT2 cells were assigned as the population closest to pAT2 cells, suggesting that priming of naive AT2 cells prior to initiation of differentiation is closely related to a cell cycle event. After excluding cAT2 cells, pseudotime analysis showed that AT2 transitions into AT1 cells via pAT2 cells and DATPs, similar to that what we observed in PAGA (Figure 1F; Haghverdi et al., 2016). Taken together, these findings reveal a differentiation trajectory of AT2 cells toward AT1 cell fate acquisition that passes through distinct pAT2 and DATP cell states during regeneration.

Given our data showing increased expression of genes associated with the immune response signatures in pAT2 cells, we next asked whether bleomycin injury resulted in inflammation (Figure S2A). By flow cytometry analysis, we found dynamic changes in macrophage behavior across injury response and regeneration. On day 7 after injury, the number and frequency of interstitial macrophages (IMs) were increased significantly, whereas the number and frequency of alveolar macrophages (AMs) were decreased (Figures S2B–S2D). These changes were restored to homeostatic levels at day 28, indicating resolution of acute inflammation. Because macrophages localized near AT2 lineage-labeled cells during acute injury (Figure S2E), we hypothesized that macrophages may affect the behavior of lineage-labeled cells in response to injury. Importantly, 3D organoid co-cultures in which AT2 cells were cultured together with IMs in the presence of stromal cells revealed more and larger organoid formation than when they were co-cultured with AMs (Figures 2A–2C; Lee et al., 2014). To further address the contribution of macrophages in alveolar regeneration after injury, we analyzed scRNA-seq of non-lineage-labeled cells from SPC-CreERT2;R26RtdTomato mice, including immune cells, isolated in parallel with samples (PBS, day 14 and day 28 in Figure 1; Figures S2F–S2H). The expression level of IL-1β, which is specifically detected in macrophages, was increased on day 14 after injury and decreased to homeostatic levels on day 28 (Figures S2H and S2I). Quantitative PCR (qPCR) analysis on isolated AMs and IMs from uninjured lungs revealed that IL-1β is highly and specifically expressed in IMs, whereas IL-18 is enriched in AMs, consistent with previous reports (Figure S2J; Misharin et al., 2017). Furthermore, granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF) activation specifically augmented IL-1β expression in IMs but did not affect IL-18 expression in AMs (Figure S2J). Notably, bleomycin injury stimulated IL-1β expression in IMs in vivo (Figure S2K). IL-1β treatment was also sufficient to increase the number and size of organoids formed by AT2 cells (Figures 2D and 2E).Figure 2IL-1β Signaling Directly Promotes Reprogramming of AT2 Cells(A) Schematic of organoid co-culture of SPC lineage-labeled AT2 cells (SPC+Tomato+) with interstitial macrophages (IMs) or alveolar macrophages (AMs) isolated from wild-type lung tissue in the presence of stromal cells. See also Figure S2.(B) Representative fluorescence images (left and center) and H&E staining (right) of AT2 organoids. GM-CSF was added to activate macrophages. Scale bars, 1,000 μm (left) and 50 μm (right).(C) Statistical quantification of colony formation efficiency and size of organoids. Each individual dot represents one experiment from one mouse, and data are presented as mean and SEM. ∗∗∗p < 0.001.(D) Representative fluorescence images (top) and H&E staining (bottom) of primary organoids derived from SPC lineage-labeled AT2 cells (SPC+Tomato+) treated with vehicle (PBS), IL-1β, or IL-18. Scale bars, 1,000 μm (top) and 50 μm (bottom).(E) Quantification of colony formation efficiency and size. Data are presented as mean and SEM.(F) UMAP visualization of cell clusters from scRNA-seq analysis of epithelial cells from control (1,286 cells) or IL-1β-treated organoids (10 ng/mL, 2,584 cells). Cells were isolated on day 21 in organoid culture. Colors indicate samples and distinct cell types. The number of cells in the individual cluster is depicted. See also Figure S3.(G) The percentage of each cluster in total cells of control or IL-1β-treated organoids.(H) Diffusion map according to diffusion pseudotime (DPT, left) order colored by sample (right).(I) qPCR analysis of genes that are upregulated (Itga7, Lrg1, and Orm1) or downregulated (Etv5, Abca3, Lpcat1, Fgfr2, and Acly) in primed AT2 cells. EpCAM+ epithelial cells were isolated from organoids treated with PBS or IL-1β on day 6 in AT2 organoid culture. Each individual dot represents one experiment, and data are presented as mean ± SEM. ∗∗p < 0.01, ∗∗∗p < 0.001.(J) Representative immunofluorescence (IF) images showing generation of DATPs marked by Cldn4 and Krt8 expression in AT2 organoids treated with IL-1β: SPC (white), Cldn4 (red), Krt8 (green), and DAPI (blue). Scale bars, 50 μm.(K) Flow cytometry analysis of DATPs by gating with Cldn4 and EpCAM. Data are presented as mean ± SEM (n = 5). ∗∗∗p < 0.001.

To find out how IL-1β affects the cellular and molecular behavior of AT2 cells, we performed scRNA-seq of control and IL-1β-treated organoids. Based on marker gene expression, we identified five distinctive clusters (AT2, pAT2, cAT2, DATPs, and AT1 cells) similar to those we had seen in AT2 lineage-labeled cells (Figure 2F; Figures S3A–S3C). In control organoids, most cell types corresponded to AT2 and AT1 cells along with smaller pAT2 and DATPs clusters (Figure 2G). In contrast, IL-1β treatment increased the pAT2 fraction to ∼77%, classified by low expression of genes such as Etv5, Abca3, and Cebpa, suggesting that IL-1β triggers AT2 cells to enter a primed state (Figure 2G). The DATP population was also increased by IL-1β treatment (Figure 2G). Pseudotime and PAGA analysis of the scRNA-seq data showed that IL-1β-treated organoids skew differentiation of AT2 cells toward the AT1 fate (Figure 2H; Figure S3D) by enhancing differentiation into pAT2 and DATP states similar to those of regenerating AT2 cells in vivo (Figures S3E and S3F). To investigate whether IL-1β directly influences AT2 cell fate transitions, we examined cellular states on days 6 and 14, two key differentiation time points across organoid formation. On day 6, qPCR analysis of IL-1β-treated organoids showed an enriched transcriptional signature of pAT2-state relative to control organoids (Figure 2I). In addition, day 14 immunostaining and flow cytometry analysis of DATP markers, such as Krt8 and Cldn4, confirmed that DATPs were increased significantly in IL-1β-treated organoids (Figures 2J and 2K). These data show that IL-1β treatment in AT2 organoids recapitulates key aspects of in vivo lung regeneration. Taken together, our data demonstrate that an IL-1β-mediated inflammatory niche triggers AT2-mediated injury response during alveolar regeneration via differentiation programs to generate DATPs.

Our scRNA-seq analysis revealed the previously unknown AT2 lineage-derived DATP population emerging during alveolar regeneration and in organoids stimulated with IL-1β. Using AT2 reporter mice (SPC-CreERT2;R26RtdTomato), we found that approximately 10% of AT2 lineage-labeled cells express Krt8 on 14 days after bleomycin injury, confirming that DATPs originate directly from AT2 cells (Figures 3A–3C). Importantly, neither the AT2 marker SPC nor the AT1 marker podoplanin (Pdpn) were detected in this population (Figures 3B and 3D). To further assess functional contributions of DATPs to alveolar regeneration, we established lineage reporter mice for N-Myc downstream-regulated 1 (Ndrg1), which is uniquely expressed in DATPs during alveolar regeneration (Ndrg1-CreERT2;R26RtdTomato) (Figures 1D and 3E). We did not detect any expression of Ndrg1 in airway epithelial cells with or without injury (Figure 3F). Consistent with our scRNA-seq data, neither AT2 and AT1 cells were labeled by Ndrg1 expression in PBS control mice (Figure 3G). However, on 9 days after bleomycin injury, Ndrg1 lineage-labeled cells emerged with a majority of cells positive for Krt8 in the alveolar region (Figures 3H and 3I). On day 28, we found that approximately 30% of AT1 cells were lineage-labeled by Ndrg1 with AT1 cell morphology (Figures 3J and 3K). We also confirmed the contribution of DATPs in AT1 cell generation with lineage-tracing analysis using Krt8 reporter mice (Krt8-CreERT2;R26RtdTomato) (Figure S4A). Consistent with Ndrg1 lineage-labeled cells, neither AT2 nor AT1 cells were labeled in uninjured lungs (Figure S4B). Krt8 expression was only detected in Cldn4+ DATPs on day 9 in the alveolar region after injury but was then prominent in Pdpn+ AT1 cells on day 28 after injury (Figures S4C–S4F).Figure 3Injury Response-Specific DATPs Are Derived from AT2 Cells and Mediate AT1 Lineage Differentiation(A) Schematics of the experimental design for SPC lineage-tracing analysis using SPC-CreERT2;R26RtdTomato mice at the indicated time points after bleomycin injury.(B) Representative IF images showing derivation of DATPs from AT2 lineage-labeled cells on day 14 after injury: Tomato (red), SPC (white), and Krt8 (green). The insets is shown magnified on the right. Arrowheads point to lineage-labeled Krt8+DATPs that do not express the AT2 marker SPC. Scale bars, 50 μm.(C) Quantification of lineage-labeled SPC+ AT2 cells or Krt8+ DATPs on day 14 after injury. Each individual dot represents one section, and data are presented as mean ± SEM with three independent experiments (n = 4).(D) Representative IF images showing derivation of DATPs from AT2 lineage-labeled cells on day 14 after injury: Tomato (red) and Pdpn (white). Arrowheads point to lineage-labeled Krt8+ DATPs that do not express the AT1 marker Pdpn. Scale bars, 10 μm.(E) Experimental design for the Ndrg1 lineage-tracing analysis using Ndrg1-CreERT2;R26RtdTomato mice after bleomycin injury. Specific time points for tamoxifen injection and analysis are indicated.(F) Representative IF images showing that airway cells are not marked by Ndrg1 expression on day 9 after PBS (left) or bleomycin (right) treatment: Tomato (for the Ndrg1 lineage, red), CC10 (green, secretory cells), acetylated tubulin (acetyl-tub) (white, ciliated cells), and DAPI (blue). Insets (1, 2, and 3) show high-power views.(G) Representative IF images show that Ndrg1 expression does not label KRT8+ DATPs, SPC+ AT2 cells, or AGER+ AT1 cells on day 9 (top and center) and day 28 (bottom) after PBS treatment: Tomato (for the Ndrg1 lineage, red), Pdpn (white, top), SPC (white, center and bottom), Krt8 (green, top and center), and Ager (green, bottom). Scale bars, 50 μm.(H) Representative IF images showing derivation of Ndrg1 lineage-labeled DATPs that are negative for AT1 or AT2 markers but positive for Krt8 on day 9 after injury: Tomato (red), Pdpn (white, top), SPC (white, bottom), Krt8 (green), and DAPI (blue). Arrowheads points to lineage-labeled DATPs. Scale bars, 50 μm.(I) Statistical quantification of Krt8+Tomato+ cells at the indicated time points after PBS or bleomycin injury. Each individual dot represents one section, and data are presented as mean ± SEM (n = 2 PBS control, n = 3 for bleomycin). ∗∗∗p < 0.001.(J) Representative IF images showing differentiation of Ndrg1 lineage-labeled AT1 and AT2 cells on day 28 after injury: Tomato (red), SPC (white), Ager (green), and DAPI (blue). Arrowheads point to lineage-labeled Ager+ AT1 cells, and arrows point to lineage-labeled SPC+ AT2 cells. The insets (left) are shown magnified on the right. Scale bars, 50 μm (left) and 10 μm (right).(K) Statistical quantification of lineage-labeled Ager+Tomato+ AT1 cells at the indicated time points after PBS or bleomycin injury. Each individual dot represents one section, and data are presented as mean ± SEM (n = 2 PBS control, n = 3 bleomycin). ∗∗∗p < 0.001.(L) Statistical quantification of lineage-labeled SPC+Tomato+ AT2 cells at the indicated time points after PBS or bleomycin injury. Each individual dot represents one section, and data are presented as mean ± SEM (n = 2 PBS control, n = 3 bleomycin). ∗∗∗p < 0.001.See also Figure S4.

We also observed that a significant number of SPC+ AT2 cells were lineage-labeled by Ndrg1 and Krt8 on day 28 after bleomycin injury (Figures 3J and 3L; Figures S4G and S4H). To confirm that DATPs possessed the capacity to dedifferentiate into AT2 cells, we isolated AT2 cells (CD31−CD45−EpCAM+MHCII+) (Hasegawa et al., 2017) from Krt8 reporter mice and performed organoid cultures in the presence of IL-1β (Figure S4I). On day 14 in culture, we added 4-OH tamoxifen to label Krt8-expressing DATPs. Consistent with immunostaining for Krt8 in organoids (Figure 2J), we detected Tomato+ cells (Krt8+ DATPs) in the inner part of organoids, which segregated distinctly from Tomato−MHC class II+ AT2 cells, as shown by flow cytometry analysis (Figures S4J and S4K). Furthermore, Krt8+ DATPs (Tomato+MHCII−) isolated from organoids were capable of forming organoids composed of DATPs and SPC+ AT2 cells (Figures S4K–S4M).

Given that IL-1β treatment increased generation of DATPs in organoids, we next asked whether IL-1β signaling is required for differentiation into DATPs in vivo. To answer this question, we generated Il1r1flox/flox;SPC-CreERT2;R26RtdTomato mice to deplete Il1r1, a functional receptor for IL-1β, specifically in AT2 cells (Figure 4A). The proliferative activity of Il1r1-deficient AT2 cells was comparable with that of Il1r1-haplodeficient AT2 cells after injury (Figure S5A). Because IL-1β treatment increased organoid size and formation efficiency (Figures 2D and 2E), we carefully examined AT2 cell proliferation by 5-ethynyl-2’-deoxyuridine (EdU) incorporation assays at an early time point (day 4) in organoid cultures. Although IL-1β-treated organoids revealed increases in EdU incorporation rates relative to the control, notably, Il1r1-deficient AT2 cells also showed a similar rate of EdU incorporation, indicating that IL-1β does not directly influence AT2 cell proliferation (Figure S5B). Given the differential expression of growth factors regulating AT2 cell proliferation in IL-1β-treated stromal cells co-cultured with AT2 cells in organoids (Figures S5C–S5E), it is highly likely that IL-1β enhances AT2 cell proliferation by modulating surrounding cells rather than by direct effects on AT2 cells.Figure 4DATPs Induced by IL-1β-Driven Hif1α Signaling Are Essential Mediators of Alveolar Regeneration(A) Experimental design of lineage tracing of Il1r1-haplodeficient or deficient AT2 cells after bleomycin administration.(B) Representative IF images showing DATPs generation from SPC lineage-labeled cells on day 10 after injury in the indicated genotype: Tomato (for SPC lineage, red), SPC (white), Krt8 (green), and DAPI (blue). Scale bars, 50 μm.(C) Quantification of lineage-labeled Krt8+ DATPs on day 10 after injury. Each individual dot represents one section, and data are presented as mean ± SEM (n = 3).(D) Representative IF images showing AT1 cell differentiation from SPC lineage-labeled cells on day 21 after injury in the indicated genotype: Tomato (for SPC lineage, red), Pdpn (white), and DAPI (blue). Scale bar, 50 μm. See also Figure S5.(E) Quantification of lineage-labeled Pdpn+ AT1 cells on day 21 after injury. Each individual dot represents one section, and data are presented as mean ± SEM (n = 6).(F) Heatmap of the transcriptional profiles of genes that are associated with Hif1a-mediated signaling, including the glycolysis pathway, in the subset of clusters.(G) Schematic of an AT2 organoid culture treated with digoxin in the presence of IL-1β.(H) Representative IF images showing impaired generation of DATPs and the AT1 lineage in digoxin-treated organoids: SPC (white), Krt8 (top, green), Hopx (bottom, red), and DAPI (blue). Scale bars, 50 μm. See also Figure S6.(I) Quantification of the frequency of AT2 (SPC+) or AT1 (Hopx+) cells (left) and the ratio of AT1/AT2 (right). Each individual dot represents one experiment, and data are presented as mean ± SEM. ∗∗∗p < 0.001.

We then further analyzed cAT2 subsets (derived from AT2 lineage-labeled cells after injury; Figure 1B), which showed stepwise cell cycle transitions based on the expression of cell cycle phase-specific genes (Figure S5F). We discovered that AT2 cells acquired transcriptional signatures of pAT2 cells during transition from S to G2/M phase in the cell cycle (Figure S5G). During this transition, expression of naive AT2 cell markers, including Abca3, was downregulated, whereas the expression of genes associated with inflammatory response, including Ptges, was induced. Remarkably, Il1r1 expression was upregulated specifically in G2/M phase (Figure S5G). Importantly, we found that Il1r1-deficient AT2 cells failed to differentiate into DATPs on day 10 after injury (Figures 4B and 4C). Subsequently, lineage-labeled AT1 cells were significantly decreased on day 21 after injury, indicating impaired differentiation of AT2 cells into AT1 cells in the absence of IL-1β signaling (Figures 4D and 4E). Overall, these findings suggest that IL-1β does not directly influence the proliferative properties of AT2 cells but, instead, primes AT2 cells to initiate cell fate transition into DATPs during alveolar regeneration.

In our next set of experiments, we asked which downstream transcription factors and/or signaling molecules driven by IL-1β are required for DATP differentiation. Upon further analysis of our in vivo and in vitro scRNA-seq data, we discovered a unique metabolic signature with higher expression of genes involved in the glycolysis pathway, such as Pgk1, Pkm, and Slc16a3 (Figure 4F). By measuring the extracellular acidification rate (ECAR) in organoids, we found that IL-1β enhanced glycolysis metabolism (Figures S6A and S6B). IL-1β-treated organoids also showed higher rates of glucose uptake compared with the control (Figure S6C). Notably, expression of Hif1α, a critical regulator of aerobic glycolysis metabolism, was enriched in DATPs (Figure 4F; Dang et al., 2008; Semenza, 2012). To determine whether Hif1α signaling is required for transition into DATPs, we treated AT2 organoids with digoxin, a potent inhibitor of Hif1α activity, in the presence of IL-1β (Figure 4G). On day 6 in culture, when higher gene signatures of pAT2 cells were detected, digoxin-treated organoids showed impaired generation of DATPs and AT1 cells (Figures 4H and 4I). We next deleted Hif1α specifically on AT2 cells using Hif1αflox/flox;SPC-CreERT2;R26RtdTomato mice (Figure S6D). Consistent with our organoid results, Hif1α-deficient AT2 cells failed to generate DATPs on day 10 after injury (Figures S6E and S6F). Similar to Il1r1-deficient AT2 cells, AT2 cells lacking Hif1α failed to differentiate into AT1 cells (Figures S6G and S6H). Taken together, these results demonstrate that IL-1β enhances Hif1α-mediated glycolysis metabolic changes that are integral for transition into DATPs and subsequent differentiation into AT1 cells during injury repair.

Given the importance of IL-1β signaling in alveolar regeneration, we asked whether all AT2 cells are equally capable of responding to IL-1β inflammatory signals. To answer this question, we generated Il1r1 reporter mice (Il1r1-CreERT2;R26RtdTomato) and treated them with tamoxifen to lineage-trace Il1r1-expressing cells (Figures 5A and 5B). We found that Il1r1 was expressed in airway ciliated cells and small subsets of mesenchyme cells in uninjured lungs (Figure 5C). Remarkably, approximately 15% of AT2 cells were lineage labeled in uninjured lungs (Figures 5D and 5E). However, bleomycin injury significantly increased the population of lineage-labeled AT2 cells up to ∼60% on day 14 after injury (Figures 5D and 5E). Il1r1 lineage-labeled AT2 cells were also more proliferative than unlabeled AT2 cells (Figures 5F and 5G). Approximately 80% of DATPs were lineage labeled by Il1r1, suggesting that DATPs mainly originate from Il1r1+AT2 cells (Figures 5H and 5I). On day 28 after injury, lineage-labeled AT1 cells were observed clearly (Figure 5J).Figure 5Il1r1+AT2 Cells Are Distinct Subsets that Generate DATPs during Alveolar Regeneration after Injury(A) Schematic of Il1r1-CreERT2 mice.(B) Experimental design for lineage tracing. Date for analysis are as indicated.(C) Representative IF images showing Il1r1 lineage-labeled cells only in ciliated cells (top), not in club cells (bottom), in uninjured airways on day 14 after two doses of tamoxifen injection: Tomato (for Il1r1 lineage, red), acetyl-tub (white), CC10 (white), and DAPI (blue). Scale bars, 50 μm.(D) Representative IF images showing Il1r1 lineage-labeled AT2 cells in the lungs of mice treated with the control (PBS) or bleomycin on day 14 after injury: Tomato (for Il1r1 lineage, red), SPC (white), and DAPI (blue). Arrowheads point to Il1r1 lineage-labeled SPC+ AT2 cells. Scale bars, 50 μm.(E) Quantification of Il1r1 lineage-labeled SPC+ AT2 cells in (C). Each individual dot represents one section, and data are presented as mean ± SEM with three independent experiments. ∗∗∗p < 0.001.(F) Representative IF images showing Ki67+ cells in lineage-labeled or unlabeled SPC+ AT2 cells on day 14 after injury: Tomato (for Il1r1 lineage, red), SPC (white), Ki67 (green), and DAPI (blue). Arrowheads points to Il1r1 lineage-labeled proliferating AT2 cells. Scale bars, 50 μm.(G) Quantification of Ki67+ AT2 cells in lineage-labeled or unlabeled SPC+ cells. Each individual dot represents one section, and data are presented as mean ± SEM with three independent experiments. ∗∗∗p < 0.001.(H) Representative IF images showing Il1r1 lineage-labeled DATPs on day 14 after injury: Tomato (for Il1r1 lineage, red), Krt8 (green), and DAPI (blue). Arrowheads points to Il1r1 lineage-labeled DATPs. Insets (left) show high-power views (right top). Scale bars, 50 μm.(I) Quantification of Il1r1 lineage-labeled DATPs on day 14 after bleomycin injury. Each individual dot represents one section, and data are presented as mean ± SEM of three independent experiments.(J) Representative IF images showing Il1r1 lineage-labeled AT1 cells on day 28 after injury: Tomato (for Il1r1 lineage, red), SPC (white), Ager (green), and DAPI (blue). Scale bars, 50 μm.

We posited that epigenetic mechanisms might shape the active response of Il1r1+AT2 cells and next performed ATAC-seq (assay for transposase-accessible chromatin with high-throughput sequencing). Although most genes, including AT2 markers and general housekeeping genes, showed similar chromatin accessibility patterns, notable differences were present in the open chromatin states in Il1r1+AT2 cells relative to bulk AT2 cells (Figures 6A and 6B; Figures S7A–S7G). Analysis of GO term distributions of the highlighted genes revealed that epigenetic regulation and inflammation-associated pathways, including IL-1 signaling, were enriched in Il1r1+AT2 cells (Figures 6C and 6D). Motif analysis of the DNA binding site showed that Il1r1+AT2-enriched chromatin contains motifs for key transcriptional factors associated with inflammation, such as AP-1, cAMP response element-binding protein (CREB), nuclear factor κB (NF-κB) and Rorc, whereas shared genes were enriched in motifs for key lung development factors, such as Nkx2.1 and Cebp (Figure 6E; Martis et al., 2006; Minoo et al., 1999; Miossec and Kolls, 2012; Schonthaler et al., 2011). Taken together, these results demonstrate that Il1r1 expression marks epigenetically distinct AT2 cell subtypes with a capacity for rapid expansion and subsequent differentiation into AT1 cells during injury response.Figure 6Il1r1+AT2 Cells Possess a Chromatin Architecture that Enables a Rapid Response to Injury(A) ATAC-seq heatmap (top) and Venn diagrams (bottom) showing genome-wide regions of differential open chromatin peaks in Il1r1+AT2 versus bulk AT2 cells in duplicates. The values correspond to the peak signal distribution around TSSs (transcription start sites). The numbers of nearest neighbor genes covered by peaks are indicated.(B) GO enrichment analysis of the nearest neighbor genes in the vicinity of peaks shared between Il1r1+AT2 and bulk AT2 cells.(C) GO enrichment analysis of the nearest neighbor genes in the vicinity of Il1r1+AT2 peaks.(D) Snapshots of genomic loci in which the chromatin-accessible peaks are specifically opened in Il1r1+AT2 cells, identified by the GO enrichment analysis shown in (C).(E) Transcription factor motif enrichment within Il1r1+AT2-specific peaks or peaks shared between Il1r1+AT2 and bulk AT2 cells.See also Figure S7.

Although the expression levels of early AT1 markers, such as Lmo7, Pdpn, and Hopx, were comparable in control and IL-1β-treated organoids (Figure 7A), we found that AT1-like cells present in IL-1β-treated organoids failed to upregulate mature AT1 markers highly expressed in control AT1 cells, such as Aqp5, Vegfa, Cav-1, and Spock2 (Figure 7B). Instead, AT1-like populations in IL-1β-treated organoids highly expressed DATP-associated genes, including Cldn4, AW112010, and Lhfp (Figure 7C), indicating that sustained IL-1β treatment in AT2 organoids causes accumulation of DATPs and prevents terminal differentiation into mature AT1 cells. We then asked whether the stalled transition to mature AT1 cells could be rescued by relieving IL-1β-mediated inflammation. We cultured AT2 organoids with IL-1β for 14 days and maintained them for an additional 7 days without IL-1β treatment (Figure 7D). Indeed, we found that expression of late AT1 markers became significantly upregulated upon IL-1β withdrawal, concomitant with downregulation of DATP markers and expression of Hif1α and other glycolysis pathway genes (Figure 7E). These findings prompted us ask whether inhibition of glycolysis in stalled DATPs might facilitate AT1 cell maturation. To this end, we treated AT2 organoids with IL-1β for 14 days and then with the glycolysis inhibitor 2-deoxyglucose (2-DG, a glucose analog that causes hexokinase inhibition and disruption of glycolysis) in the continued presence of IL-1β for an additional 4 days (Figure 7F). Notably, inhibition of high-glucose metabolism significantly upregulated expression of mature AT1 markers (Figure 7G). With immunostaining, we confirmed that AT2 cells with persistent IL-1β treatment failed to generate mature AT1 cells expressing Cav-1, a late AT1 cell marker, whereas the expression level of Hopx, an early AT1 cell marker, was comparable with that seen in controls (Figure 7H). Importantly, 2-DG-treated organoids rescued impaired maturation of AT1 cells even in the presence of IL-1β (Figure 7H).Figure 7The Glycolysis Pathway, Driven by IL-1β, Prevents DATPs from Converting into Terminally Mature AT1 Cells(A–C) Violin plots showing the log-transformed (log10(TPM+1)), normalized expression levels of early AT1 (A), late AT1 (B), and DATP (C) marker genes in DATPs or control or IL-1β-treated AT1 cells, as revealed by scRNA-seq analysis of organoids.(D) Schematic of an AT2 organoid culture treated with or without IL-1β.(E) qPCR analysis of mature AT1 markers on isolated epithelial cells from AT2 organoids. Date are presented as mean ± SEM of four biological replicates from two independent experiments. ∗p < 0.05, ∗∗p < 0.01, ∗∗∗p < 0.001.(F) Schematic of an AT2 organoid culture treated with or without 2-deoxy glucose (2-DG) in the presence of IL-1β.(G) qPCR analysis of mature AT1 markers on isolated epithelial cells from AT2 organoids. Each individual dot represents one experiment, and data are presented as mean ± SEM. ∗p < 0.05, ∗∗p < 0.01, ∗∗∗p < 0.001.(H) Representative IF images showing rescued maturation of AT1 cells in 2-DG-treated organoids in the presence of IL-1β: SPC (white), Hopx (top, red), Cav-1 (bottom, red), and DAPI (blue). Scale bars, 50 μm.(I) Representative IF images of a KRT8+CLDN4+ DATP-like population in lungs from normal donors (n = 3): HTII-280 (red), CLDN4 (white), KRT8 (green) and DAPI (blue). Scale bar, 50 μm. See also Figure S7.(J) Representative IF images of a KRT8+CLDN4+ DATP-like population in lungs from IPF patients (n = 5). HTII-280 (red), CLDN4 (white), KRT8 (green), and DAPI (blue). Scale bars, 50 μm.(K) High-power view of the insets in (J): HTII-280 (red), CLDN4 (white), KRT8 (green), and DAPI (blue). Scale bar, 50 μm.

We hypothesized that a chronic inflammatory environment will lead to gradual accumulation of DATPs and, eventually, defective differentiation and declining lung regeneration. Recent studies using a high-resolution scRNA-seq analysis reported that a transcriptionally distinct KRT17+ population accumulates aberrantly in a non-permissive pathologic environment, such as with idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF) (Adams et al., 2019; Habermann et al., 2019; Wu et al., 2020). Consistent with a recent study (Kobayashi et al., 2019), we also found that most markers that are specific to KRT17+ cells were also highly expressed in DATPs (Figure S7H). Indeed, we observed abundant KRT8+CLDN4+ DATP-like cells next to HTII-280+ AT2 cells in alveolar regions of IPF patient tissue samples but not within alveoli of normal donor lungs (Figures 7I–7K). In addition, given the close relationship between chronic inflammation and lung cancer and recent reports suggesting transcriptional features of injury responses in lung tumor cells, we also found that KRT8+CLDN4+ DATP-like cells can be observed within the tumor in patient tissue samples of lung adenocarcinoma (Figure S7I; Conway et al., 2016; Mantovani et al., 2008; Maynard et al., 2019; Moll et al., 2018). Taken together, these findings demonstrate that chronic inflammatory signals cause dysregulation of DATPs, which leads to development and/or progression of human lung diseases.

Effectively coordinated tissue repair is critical for maintenance of tissue integrity and function. In responding to environmental assault, the ability to sense physiological changes is essential for stem cells to initiate repair and resolve damage. Here we focused on how inflammatory stimuli direct the cell fate behavior of AT2 stem cells during lung injury repair. Our data reveal the detailed stepwise differentiation trajectories of AT2 cells, which are regulated by IL-1β-mediated inflammatory signals during the regeneration process. Significantly, we identified Il1r1+AT2 cells and DATPs as two classes of regenerative cell populations dedicated to lung injury repair. Our findings bring new insight into how unresolved inflammation mediated by persistent IL-1β signals prevents cell fate transitions, resulting in impaired regeneration and eventually leading to lung diseases.

Although the mechanisms underlying alveolar regeneration are complex, our scRNA-seq analysis of in vivo AT2 lineage-labeled cells and AT2 cell-derived organoids defines the precise reprograming of AT2 cells into AT1 cells during injury repair. We discovered two distinct populations, pAT2 cells and DATPs, as intermediaries between quiescent AT2 and terminally differentiated AT1 lineages. pAT2 cells highly express genes that respond to inflammation (e.g., Pteges, Orm1, and Zbp1), are involved in promoting angiogenesis (e.g., Lrg1, Cxcl17, and Egfl6/7), and reduce reactive oxidative species (ROS) (e.g., Glrx, Prdx4, and Gstk1/2). These properties suggest that pAT2 cells actively respond to inflammatory stimuli, reshaping reciprocal interactions between epithelial cells and their niches during tissue repair. pAT2 cells display much lower expression of genes that are essential for AT2 identity and maintenance, such as Etv5 and Abca3, while still expressing comparable levels of canonical AT2 markers, such as Sftpc and Lyz2. These transcriptional signatures were also seen in IL-1β -treated AT2 cells, leading us to classify pAT2 cells as a population that is skewed toward the AT1 cell fate.

Our data reveal that pAT2 cells share a transcriptional program resembling that of cAT2 cells but with lower expression levels of cell cycle genes (e.g., MKi67 and Cdk1). Interestingly, we found that transcriptional signatures of pAT2 cells were upregulated during transition from S to G2/M phase in the cell cycle, suggesting the possibility of entering primed states after exiting proliferation states, although further validation studies, such as genetic tracing of cAT2 or pAT2 cells, are needed to provide the delineated sequence of trajectories between these two states. In addition, at variance with a previous study in Il1r1–/– mice (Katsura et al., 2019), we found that the proliferative activity of AT2 cells is not directly altered by Il1r1 depletion. Instead, our findings in organoid co-culture experiments revealed that stromal cells responding to IL-1β likely support AT2 cell proliferation. scRNA-seq analysis of stromal cells co-cultured with AT2 cells showed that expression of growth factors facilitating AT2 cell proliferation, such as the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) ligands (e.g., Ereg), Spp1, and Hgf (Ganguly et al., 2014; Zeng et al., 2016) was dramatically increased in IL-1β-treated stromal cells, whereas Bmp4 (Weaver et al., 2000), which is known to inhibit AT2 cell proliferation, was significantly reduced. Negative regulators of Bmp4 signaling, such as Grem1/2, were increased in IL-1β-treated stromal cells. Notably, cAT2 cells acquire transcriptional characteristics of pAT2 cells coupled with upregulation of Il1r1 expression at the transition from S to G2/M phase. These data suggest that IL-1β directly reprograms daughter AT2 cells to enter primed states during G2/M phase to initiate cell fate transitions without direct influence on cell proliferation. How IL-1β signaling triggers priming of AT2 cells to initiate the differentiation process remains unknown. Recently, Wnt signaling has been reported to prevent reprogramming of AT2 cells into AT1 cells (Nabhan et al., 2018), suggesting that crosstalk between IL-1β and Wnt signaling underlies control of cell fate transitions from naive AT2 to primed cell states.

We discovered a previously unidentified DATP population as an intermediate plastic subpopulation between pAT2 and AT1 cell differentiation states. DATPs expressing Ndrg1, Cldn4, and Krt8 are extremely rare at steady state but are significantly induced after injury by IL-1β-mediated inflammatory signaling. A lineage-tracing analysis demonstrated their capacity to give rise to new AT1 cells during alveolar regeneration after injury. Specifically, we determined that IL-1β-driven inflammation and regulation of the Hif1α signaling pathway is essential for DATP generation. Specific deletion of Hif1α in AT2 cells impaired this progression, resulting in deficient production of new AT1 cells. In addition, we also defined that reduction of IL-1β-driven glycolysis is required for transition of DATPs toward initiating AT1 lineage differentiation. This finding suggests that IL-1β-mediated inflammation and transient glycolytic metabolism by generating DATPs may establish a checkpoint determining entry into mature AT1 cell differentiation programs. Of note, DATPs have quiescent characteristics represented by expression of cell cycle inhibition, p53 signaling, and senescence marker genes. In addition, emerging evidence supported by high-resolution scRNA-seq suggests an essential role of “intermediates” during the developmental process in governing cell fate choices (Olsson et al., 2016). Interestingly, we also found that DATPs may have the plasticity required to revert to the AT2 lineage in addition to proceeding toward AT1 differentiation.

By combining lineage trancing and ATAC-seq analysis, we uncovered that Il1r1+AT2 cells take on distinct epigenetic state as they efficiently replenish damaged alveolar lineages in response to IL-1β inflammatory signals. Specific open-chromatin states in regions recognized by epigenetic regulators, including chromatin remodelers (e.g., Ino80) and epigenetic modifiers (e.g., Hat1) allow their rapid and organized response to injury during the regeneration process. Significantly, we found that DATPs mainly arise from Il1r1+AT2 cells in response to IL-1β signaling after injury. Recently, Axin2+AT2 cells have been identified as a distinct subset of AT2 cells (Nabhan et al., 2018; Zacharias et al., 2018). Related to the potential role of interconnectivity between IL-1β and Wnt signaling in fate decision of AT2 cells, comparison of Il1r1+AT2 and Axin2+AT2 cells will be helpful to understand their relationships during alveolar regeneration.

Resolution of inflammation is a coordinated and active process aimed to restore tissue integrity and function. Our data highlight the importance of macrophage activation in the transient inflammatory niche after tissue injury. The increased number of IMs and level of IL-1β peaked on day 14 and resolved to the homeostatic level on day 28 after injury. Analysis of lineage-tracing and scRNA-seq data also revealed that pAT2 cells and DATPs appearing after injury become dramatically reduced as tissue returns to homeostasis. However, significantly, we found that sustained IL-1β signaling causes defects in transition from DATPs to terminal differentiation to the AT1 lineage, which results in impaired regeneration. Our finding reveals the cellular and molecular mechanisms of chronic inflammation in tissue dysfunction and pathogenesis. Two recent studies showed fibrosis-specific KRT17+ cell populations in patient tissues of IPF (Adams et al., 2019; Habermann et al., 2019). Here we find that these populations and DATPs have similar transcriptional signatures, also supported by a recent study showing the enriched signatures of the Cldn4+ pre-AT1 transitional state in these KRT17+ populations in IPF tissues (Kobayashi et al., 2019). Furthermore, we detected KRT8+CLDN4+ DATP-like cells in the alveolar regions of IPF tissue samples. In addition, several studies have revealed that mechanisms underlying cancer development co-opt regeneration programs to drive tumoral cellular heterogeneity (Maynard et al., 2019; Moll et al., 2018). Congruent with this work, we also observed DATP-like cells in tissue samples of human lung adenocarcinoma. Our results strongly suggest that fine modulation of DATPs by the IL-1β-mediated transient inflammatory niche during injury repair is critical for effective lung restoration and is a potential therapeutic adjunct for treating lung diseases.

Our study identified that subsets of Il1r1+AT2 cells have distinctive epigenetic signatures and quickly respond to injury-induced inflammation for efficient AT1 cell generation. Although it is clear that only a subset of AT2 cells expressed Il1r1 and expanded up to 60% of total AT2 cells during injury repair, we cannot completely rule out the possibility of stochastic expression of cre recombination for Il1r1 expression during the repair process because of the remaining tamoxifen activity. Washout periods longer than 16 days may provide clearer evidence to further define the functionally distinctive subsets of Il1r1+AT2 cells during injury repair.

The datasets of scRNA-seq and ATAC-seq analysis generated during this study are available at GEO: GSE145031 (scRNA-seq of AT2 lineage-tracing), GEO: GSE144468 (scRNA-seq of organoids), and GEO: GSE144598 (ATAC-seq). Software used to analyze the data are either freely or commercially available.

SPC-CreERT2 (Barkauskas et al., 2013), Rosa26-lox-stop-lox-tdTomato (Madisen et al., 2010), Ndrg1-CreERT2 (Endo et al., 2015), Krt8-CreERT2 (Van Keymeulen et al., 2011), Hi1faflox/flox (Garayoa et al., 2000), and Il1r1flox/flox (Robson et al., 2016) mice have been described and are available from Jackson Laboratory. Il1r1-P2A-eGFP-IRES-CreERT2 (Il1r1-CreERT2) mice were generated in our laboratory. Mice for the lineage tracing and injury experiments were on a C57BL/6 background and 6-10 weeks old mice were used for most of the experiments described in this study. Experiments were approved by local ethical review committees and conducted according to UK Home Office project license PC7F8AE82. Mice were bred and maintained under specific-pathogen-free conditions at the Cambridge Stem Cell Institute and Gurdon Institute of University of Cambridge.

Lung organoids were established following the previous report (Lee et al., 2014). Briefly, freshly sorted lineage-labeled cells were resuspended in 3D basic media (DMEM/F12 (GIBCO) supplemented with 10% FBS. (GIBCO) and ITS (Insulin-Transferrin-Selenium, Corning)), and mixed with cultured lung stromal cells, followed by resuspension in growth factor-reduced Matrigel (BD Biosciences) at a ratio of 1:5. A 100 μL mixture was placed in a 24-well Transwell insert with a 0.4-μm pore (Corning). Approximately 5 × 103

SPC+ cells were seeded in each insert. 500 μL of 3D basic media was placed in the lower chamber, and medium was changed every other day with or without IL-1β (20ng/ml, Peprotech), Digoxin (50 μM, Sigma), and 2-deoxyglucose (5mM, Sigma). ROCK inhibitor Y27632 (10uM, Sigma) was added in the medium for the first 2 days of culture. For isolation of stroma cells, cells negatively isolated by CD31 via MACS column were further negatively sorted by CD326 (EpCAM) and CD45 microbeads (Miltenyi Biotech). For co-culture with macrophages, sorted interstitial or alveolar macrophages were added to organoids with lineage-labeled SPC+ cells at a ratio of 1:6 in the presence of lung stromal cells. GM-CSF (20ng/ml, Peprotech) was included in some cultures. Analysis of colony forming efficiency (C.F.U) and size of organoids were at 14 days after plating if there is no specific description. For organoid culture of DATPs, AT2 cells (CD31–CD45–EpCAM+MHCII+) isolated from Krt8-CreERT2;R26RtdTomato were cultured with for 14 days with IL-1β (20ng/ml, Peprotech). Then, 4-OH tamoxifen was added at day14 and day16 in culture to label Krt8-expressing cells. Organoids were cultured with EpCAM+MHCII–Tomato+ DATPs isolated by flow cytometry.

Interstitial macrophages (CD45+CD64+Siglec-F–CD11bhigh) or alveolar macrophages (CD45+CD64+Siglec-F+CD11blow) were isolated from C57BL/6 by MOFLO system (Beckman Coulter). Isolated macrophages were cultured for 24 hr in RPMI-1640 medium containing 10% FBS and 50 μM 2-mercaptoethanol with or without GM-CSF (10 ng/ml).

Papworth Hospital NHS Foundation Trust (Research Tissue Bank Generic REC approval, Tissue Bank Project number T02233) provided deidentified lung samples obtained from IPF patients at the time of transplantation, normal background lung tissue from adult donor lungs that were deemed unsuitable for transplant, and lung adenocarcinoma tissues from lobectomies. Fresh tissues were fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde (PFA) overnight at 4°C and paraffin sections (7um) were used for immunofluorescent (IF) analysis.

Tamoxifen (Sigma) was dissolved in Mazola corn oil (Sigma) in a 20mg/ml stock solution. 0.2mg/g body weight tamoxifen was given via intraperitoneal (IP) injection. The numbers and date of treatment are indicated in the individual figures of experimental scheme.

6-10 week mice were anesthetised via inhalation of isoflurane for approximately 3 mins. The mice were positioned on the intratracheal intubation stand, and 1.25U/kg of bleomycin, or PBS control, were delivered intratracheally by a catheter (22G). During the procedure anesthesia was maintained by isoflurane and oxygen delivery.

Lung tissues were dissociated with a collagenase/dispase solution as previously described. Briefly, after lungs were cleared by perfusion with cold PBS through the right ventricle, 2 mL of dispase (BD Biosciences, 50 U/ml) was instilled into the lungs through the trachea until the lungs inflated, followed by instillation of 1% low melting agarose (BioRad) through the trachea to prevent leakage of dispase. Each lobe was dissected and minced into small pieces in a conical tube containing 3 mL of PBS, 60 μL of collagenase/dispase (Roche), and 7.5 μL of 1% DNase I (Sigma) followed by rotating incubation for 45 min at 37°C. The cells were then filtered sequentially through 100- and 40-μm strainers and centrifuged at 1000rpm for 5 min at 4°C. The cell pellet was resuspended in 1ml of ACK lysis buffer (0.15 M NH4Cl, 10mM KHCO3, 0.1 mM EDTA) and lysed for 90 s at room temperature. 6 mL basic F12 media (GIBCO) was added and 500 μL of FBS (Hyclone) was slowly added in the bottom of tube. Cells were centrifuged at 1500 rpm for 5 min at 4°C. The cell pellet was resuspended in PF10 buffer (PBS with 10% FBS) for further staining. The antibodies used were as follows: CD45 (30-F11)-APC or -APC-Cy7 (BD Biosciences), CD31 (MEC13.3)-APC (BD Biosciences), Biotin- conjugated mouse lineage (Lin) panel that contains anti-B220 (RA3-6B2), -CD3ε(145-2C11), -Gr-1 (RB6-8C5), -CD11b (Mac-1, M1/70), -Ter-119 antibodies (Biolegend), EpCAM (G8.8)-PE-Cy7 or FITC (BioLegend), Sca-1 (Ly-6A/E, D7)–APC-Cy7 (BD Bioscience), MHC-II (I-A/I-E, M5)-FITC (eBiosceince), CD64 (X54-5/7.1)-PeCy7 (Biolegend), CD24(M1/69)-APC (eBioscience), and Siglec-F(E50-2440)-PE (BD Bioscience). 4’, 6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI) (Sigma) was used to eliminate dead cells. Data were acquired on LSRII analyzer (BD Biosceince) and then analyzed with FlowJo software (Tree Star). MOFLO system (Beckman Coulter) was used for the sorting at Wellcome-MRC Stem Cell Institute Flow Cytometry Facility.

Lineage-labeled AT2 cells from Il1r1flox/+;R26RtdTomato or Il1r1flox/flox;R26RtdTomato mice given by two doses of tamoxifen were isolated at day 4 post final injection. Organoids established in 8 well chamber slides (μ-Slide 8 wells, ibidi) were treated with EdU (10 μM) at day 4 for 4 hr. EdU staining was performed according to manufacturer’s instructions (Click-iT® EdU Imaging Kits, Thermo Fisher Scientific).

ECAR of organoids was measured using a XF94 analyzer (Seahorse Bioscience). Seahorse plates were pre-coated with 10% Matrigel in PBS for 1hr at 37°C. Organoids treated with PBS control or IL-1β were added with dispase to remove Matrigel and washed twice with XF Base Medium (DME, pH 7.4) supplemented with 1mM glutamine (Seahorse Bioscience). 30,000 cells were seeded on each well and incubated for 1hr at 37°C in non-CO2 incubator before measurement. Three components were injected automatically during the assay to achieve the following final concentrations: Glucose (10mM), Oligomycin (1 μM), and 2-Deoxy Glucose (2-DG, 50mM). ECAR were normalized to the cell numbers of each wells.

Organoids at day 14 were washed twice with PBS and incubated with glucose-free medium supplemented with 10% FBS and GlutaMax (GIBCO) for 1hr. 200 μM of 2-NBDG (Life Technologies) were subsequently added for 1hr. Organoids were dissociated into single cells with trypLE Express (GIBCO) and cells were harvested for flow cytometry. A control sample lacking 2-NBDG was used to set the flow cytometer compensation and gate parameters for 2-NBDG positive events.

Total RNA was isolated using TRI- reagent (Molecular Research Center) or using a QIAGEN RNeasy Micro Kit according the manufacturer’s instructions. Equivalent quantities of total RNA were reverse-transcribed with SuperScript cDNA synthesis kit (Life Technology) or QuantiTect (QIAGEN). Diluted cDNA was analyzed by real-time PCR (StepOnePlus; Applied Biosystem). Pre-designed probe sets and TaqMan universal PCR Master Mix (2x, Thermo Fisher Scientific) were used as follows: Ager (Mm_00545815_m1), Pdpn (Mm_00494716_m1), Aqp5 (Mm_00437578_m1). Gapdh expression (Mm_00805216_m1) was used to normalize samples using the ΔCt method. Sybr green assays were also used with SYBR Green Master Mix (2x, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Primer sequences are as follows:Gapdh: F-AGGTCGGTGTGAACGGATTTG, R-TGTAGACCATGTAGTTGAGGTCAVegfa: F-CCGGTTTAAATCCTGGAGCG, R-TTTAACTCAAGCTGCCTCGCClic5: F-ATGACGGACTCAGCGACAAC, R-GTAGATCGGCTGGCTTTCTTTTCav-1: F-TGAGAAGCAAGTGTATGACGC, R-CTTCCAGATGCCGTCGAAACAqp5: F-TCTTGTGGGGATCTACTTCACC, R-TGAGAGGGGCTGAACCGATSdpr: F-GCTGCACAGGCAGAAAAGTTC, R-GTGACAGCATTCACCTGCGSpock2: F-ACCCCCGGCAATTTCATGG, R-TGTCTTCCCAGCTCTTGATGTAALimch2: F-AAAGGCCCTTCAGATACGGTC, R-TACTCGTGCTCTCTGCGTCATEtv5: F-TCAGTCTGATAACTTGGTGCTTC, R-GGCTTCCTATCGTAGGCACAAAbca3: F-CAGCTCACCCTCCTACTCTG, R-ACTGGATCTTCAAGCGAAGCCLpcat1: F-GGCTCCTGTTCGCTGCTTT, R-TTCACAGCTACACGGTGGAAGItga7: F-CTGCTGTGGAAGCTGGGATTC, R-CTCCTCCTTGAACTGCTGTCGLrg1: F-TTGGCAGCATCAAGGAAGC, R-CAGATGGACAGTGTCGGCAOrm1: F-CGAGTACAGGCAGGCAATTCA, R-ACCTATTGTTTGAGACTCCCGASlc2a1: F-CAGTTCGGCTATAACACTGGTG, R-GCCCCCGACAGAGAAGATGSlc16a3: F-TCACGGGTTTCTCCTACGC, R-GCCAAAGCGGTTCACACACCldn4: F-GTCCTGGGAATCTCCTTGGC, R-TCTGTGCCGTGACGATGTTGHif1a: F-ACCTTCATCGGAAACTCCAAAG, R-ACTGTTAGGCTCAGGTGAACTIL-1β: F-GCAACTGTTCCTGAACTCAACT, R-ATCTTTTGGGGTCCGTCAACTIL-13: F-CCTGGGCTCTTGTCTGCCTT, R-GGTCTTGTTGATGTTGCTCAIL-18: F-GACTCTTGCGTCAACTTCAAGG, R-CAGGCTGTCTTTTGTCAACGAIL-22: F-ATGAGTTTTTCCCTTATGGGGAC, R-GCTGGAAGTTGGACACCTCAAIL-33: F-TCCAACTCCAAGATTTCCCCG, R-CATGCAGTAGACATGGCAGAAFgf7: F-TTTGGAAAGAGCGACGACTT, R-GGCAGGATCCGTGTCAGTATIL-6: F-TCTATACCACTTCACAAGTCGGA, R-GAATTGCCATTGCACAACTCTTT

Mouse lung tissues were routinely perfused, inflated, and fixed with 4% PFA for 4-6 hr at 4 degrees and cryosections (8um) and paraffin sections (7um) were used for histology and IF analysis. Cultured colonies from organoids were fixed with 4% PFA for 2-4 hr at room temperature followed by immobilization with Histogel (Thermo Scientific) for paraffin embedding. Sectioned lung tissues or colonies were stained with hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) or immunostained: after antigen retrieval with citric acid (0.01M, pH 6.0), blocking was performed with 5% normal donkey serum in 0.2% Triton-X/PBS at room temperature for 1hr. Primary antibodies were incubated overnight at 4°C at the indicated dilutions: goat anti-SP-C (1:200, Santa Cruz Biotechnology Inc., sc-7706), pro-SP-C (1:300, Millipore, AB3786), rabbit anti-Ki67 (1:250, A. Menarini, MP-325-CRM1), rat anti-Ki67 (1:200, Biolegend, A16A8), rabbit anti-RFP (1:250, Rockland, 600–401379), hamster anti-PDPN (1:1000, DSHB, 8.1.1), rat anti-Cytokeratin-8 (1:300, DSHB, TROMA-I), rabbit anti-Claudin-4 (1:200, Thermo Fisher Scientific, 36-4800), rabbit anti-Hopx (1:100, Santa Cruz Biotechnology Inc., sc-30216), rabbit anti-Aqp5 (1:200, Alomone Labs, AQP5-005), rabbit anti-Caveolin-1 (1:500, Cell Signaling, #3267), and mouse anti-HTII-280 (1:200, Terrace Biotechnology, TB-27AHT2-280). Alexa Fluor-coupled secondary antibodies (1:500, Invitrogen) were incubated at room temperature for 60 min. After antibody staining, nuclei were stained with DAPI (1:1000, Sigma) and sections were embedded in Vectashield (Vector Labs). Fluorescence images were acquired using a confocal microscope (Leica TCS SP5). All the images were further processed with Fiji software.

The ATAC-seq assay was performed on 50,000 FACS-purified cells as previously described (Buenrostro et al., 2015). In brief, two biological independent samples were used for ATAC-seq experiment. 5 mice were pooled for Il1r1+AT2 cells and 1 mouse was used for bulk AT2 cells per group. Purified cells were lysed in ATAC lysis buffer for 5 min to get nuclei and then transposed with Tn5 transposase (Illumina) for 30 min. Fractionated DNA was used for amplification and library preparation according to manufacturer’s guidelines (Illumina) and 150 bp-paired end sequencing was performed by pooling two samples of Il1r1+AT2 and bulk AT2 cells, respectively, in one lane of the Illumina HiSeq 4000 platform. The quality of the generated sequencing data was checked using the FastQC program, followed by filtering of adaptor and/or overrepresented sequences using Trimmomatic (Bolger et al., 2014). Filtered reads were next mapped to the mouse primary genome assembly (mm9/GRCm38) using STAR (Dobin et al., 2013), with parameters –outFilterMatchNminOverLread 0.4 –outFilterScoreMinOverLread 0.4, and a GTF annotation file of the latest mouse assembly (GCA_000001635.8) downloaded from ENSEMBL ftp. Duplicate reads were flagged and removed using MarkDuplicates from Picard tools. MACS2(Feng et al., 2012) callpeak was used for ATAC-seq peak calling of the Il1r1+AT2 and bulk AT2 samples, using the options –nomodel–shift −100 –extsize 200. Differentially enriched peaks in Il1r1+AT2 and bulk AT2 populations were next inferred using the MACS2 bdgdiff with a log10 likelihood ratio score cutoff of 10. ATAC-seq heatmaps were plotted using deepTools2 (Ramírez et al., 2016). Annotation of ATAC-seq enriched peaks overlapping with promoter and other gene regions was performed using the ChIPseeker R/Bioconductor package, together with GO enrichment and pathway analyzes (Yu et al., 2015). Finally, motif identification was performed using the findMotifsGenome.pl program of the HOMER software (Heinz et al., 2010).

Established organoids of control or IL-1β-treatment were incubated with dispase (BD Bioscience) for 30-60min. Then, cells were dissociated with TripLE (GIBCO) for 5min, followed by washing with buffer (PBS/0.01% BSA). For SPC lineage-labeled cells, CD45–CD31–EpCAM+Tomato+ cells were sorted at specific time points (at day 14 and day 28 post damage) from PBS or Bleomycin-treated mice (2 mice were pooled for each experiment). For non-lineage-labeled cells isolated from SPC-CreERT2;R26RtdTomato mice in parallel with experiment of SPC lineage-labeled cells, we combined the cells of EpCAM+Tomato– and EpCAM– population with a ratio of 2:1, respectively. The resulting cell suspension (∼110,000 cells each) were submitted as separate samples to be barcoded for the droplet-encapsulation single- cell RNA-seq experiments using the Chromium Controller (10X Genomics). Single cell cDNA synthesis, amplification and sequencing libraries were generated using the Single Cell 3′ Reagent Kit as per the 10x Genomics protocol. Libraries were multiplexed so that 2 libraries were sequenced per single lane of HiSeq 4000 using the following parameters: Read1: 26 cycles, i7: 8 cycles, i5: 0 cycles; Read2: 98 cycles to generate 75bp paired end reads.

Droplet-based sequencing data was aligned and quantified using the Cell Ranger Single-Cell Software Suite (version 2.0.2, 10x Genomics Inc) using the Mus musculus genome (GRCm38) (official Cell Ranger reference, version 1.2.0). Cells were filtered by custom cutoff (more than 500 and less than 7000 detected genes, more than 2000 UMI count) to remove potential empty droplets and doublets. Downstream analysis included data normalization, highly variable gene detection, log transformation, principal component analysis, neighborhood graph generation and Louvain graph-based clustering, which was done by python package scanpy (version 1.3.6) (Wolf et al., 2018) using default parameters.

For scRNA-seq analysis of organoids, we excluded the cluster of EpCAM– cells of stromal cells we put together with AT2 cells in culture. For in vivo scRNA-seq analysis of AT2 cells after bleomycin injury, we excluded non-epithelial cells and ciliated cells based on marker gene expression. Although cells were sorted based on the expression of EpCAM, CD31, CD45, and Tomato before scRNA-seq, 255 contaminating cells among 12514 cells captured were observed in the initial droplet dataset. These comprised: 214 ciliated cells expressing Foxj1, Wnt7b, and Cd24a; 16 mesenchyme cells expressing Vcam1, Acta2, Des, and Pdgfra; 25 immune cells expressing Ptprc (CD45), Tyrobp, Il2rg, and Lck. Each of these cell populations was identified by an initial round of unsupervised Louvain graph-based clustering analysis as they formed extremely distinct clusters and then removed. For scRNA-seq analysis of in vivo non-lineage-labeled cells, we excluded the doublet cluster of cells expressing both EpCAM+CD45+ (1125 cells among 14017 cells).

To exclude doublets from single-cell RNA sequencing data, we applied scrublet algorithm per sample to calculate scrublet-predicted doublet score per cell with following parameters: sim_doublet_ratio = 2; n_neighbors = 30; expected_doublet_rate = 0.1. Any cell with scrublet score > 0.7 was flagged as doublet. To propagate the doublet detection into potential false-negatives from scrublet analysis, we over-clustered the dataset (sc.tl.louvain function from scanpy package version 1.3.4; resolution = 20), and calculated the average doublet score within each cluster. Any cluster with averaged scrublet score > 0.6 was flagged as a doublet cluster. All remaining cell clusters were further examined to detect potential false-negatives from scrublet analysis according to the following criteria: (1) Expression of marker genes from two distinct cell types which are unlikely according to prior knowledge, (2) higher number of UMI counts.

All data contained within our processed Seurat object for the wild-type dataset was converted to the AnnaData format for pseudotime analysis in Scanpy (version 1.3.6). We recalculated k-nearest neighbors at k = 15. Pseudotime was calculated using Scanpy’s partitioned-based graph abstraction function, PAGA. Diffusion pseudotime was performed using Scanpy’s DPT function with default parameters.

Sections included in cell scoring analysis for lung tissue were acquired using Leica TCS SP5 confocal microscope. At least five different sections including at least 10 alveolar regions from three individual mice per group were used. Cell counts were performed on ImageJ using the ‘Cell Counter’ plug-in and the performer was blinded to the specimen genotype and condition. At least two step sections (30um apart) per individual well were used for quantification of AT1 or AT2 cells. Statistical methods relevant to each figure are outlined in the figure legend. Statistical analyzes were performed with Prism software package version 7.0 (GraphPad). P values were calculated using two-tailed unpaired or paired Student’s t test. Sample size for animal experiments was determined based upon pilot experiments. Mice cohort size was designed to be sufficient to enable accurate determination of statistical significance. No animals were excluded from the statistical analysis. Mice were randomly assigned to treatment or control groups, while ensuring inclusion criteria based on gender and age. Animal studies were not performed in a blinded fashion. The number of animals shown in each figure is indicated in the legends as n = x mice per group. Data shown are either representative of three or more independent experiments, or combined from three or more independent experiments as noted and analyzed as mean ± SEM.

We would like to thank Emma Rawlins (University of Cambridge, UK) for valuable scientific discussions and sharing mouse lines; Randall Johnson (University of Cambridge, UK) for sharing the Hif1aflox/flox mouse line; Nisha Narayan and Brian Huntly for sharing materials and discussions regarding glycolysis experiments; Irina Pshenichnaya (histology), Maike Paramor (NGS library), Peter Humphreys (imaging), Andy Riddell (flow cytometry), Simon McCallum (flow cytometry, Cambridge NIHR BRC Cell Phenotyping Hub), Katarzyna Kania (single-cell sequencing at Cancer Research UK), and the Cambridge Stem Cell Institute core facilities for technical assistance; the Papworth Hospital Research Tissue Bank for providing IPF and lung adenocarcinoma (T02233) tissue samples; Kelly Evans for sharing histology samples of human lung tissue; Seungmin Han and Woochang Hwang for discussions regarding scRNA-seq analysis; Life Science Editors for editorial assistance; and all Lee lab members for helpful discussions. This work was supported by 10.13039/100010269Wellcome and the 10.13039/501100000288Royal Society (107633/Z/15/Z) and a European Research Council starting grant (679411). J.C. was supported by the 10.13039/501100003725National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) funded by the Ministry of Education (2017R1A6A3A03005399).

J.C. and J.-H.L. designed the experiments, interpreted the data, and wrote the manuscript. J.C. performed most experiments and data analysis. J.-E.P. performed and analyzed scRNA-seq data. G.T. and N.H. analyzed ATAC-seq data. M.Y. shared the Ndrg1-CreERT2 mouse line. B.-K.K. helped with generation of the Il1r1-CreERT2 mouse line.