Mast cell (MC)-associated disorders exhibit a sex bias, with females at increased risk. While attention has been directed to adult sex hormones as a mechanism for disease risk between the sexes, epidemiological evidence clearly shows that these same sex biases also exist in prepubertal children, thus challenging this concept. Here, we show that perinatal, but not adult gonadal, androgens play a protective role in MC-mediated anaphylaxis severity into adulthood. We propose that perinatal androgens mediate their protective effects via programming of bone marrow MC precursors to exhibit reduced granule histamine and release. These findings shift attention to perinatal life as a critical period for potential interventions to mitigate MC-associated disease risk across the lifespan in males and females.

Mast cell (MC)-associated diseases, including allergy/anaphylaxis and neuroinflammatory pain disorders, exhibit a sex bias, with females at increase risk. While much attention has been directed toward adult sex hormones as drivers of sex differences, that female sex bias in MC-associated diseases is evident in prepubertal children, suggesting early-life origins of sex differences which have yet to be explored. Utilizing rodent models of MC-mediated anaphylaxis, our data here reveal that, 1) compared with females, males exhibit significantly reduced severity of MC-mediated anaphylactic responses that emerge prior to puberty and persist into adulthood, 2) reduced severity of MC-mediated anaphylaxis in males is linked with the naturally high level of perinatal androgens and can be recapitulated in females by perinatal exposure to testosterone proprionate, 3) perinatal androgen exposure guides bone marrow MC progenitors toward a masculinized tissue MC phenotype characterized by decreased concentration of prestored MC granule mediators (e.g., histamine, serotonin, and proteases) and reduced mediator release upon degranulation, and 4) engraftment of MC-deficient KitW-sh/W-sh mice with adult male, female, or perinatally androgenized female MCs results in MC-mediated anaphylaxis response that reflects the MC sex and not host sex. Together, these data present evidence that sex differences in MC phenotype and resulting disease severity are established in early life by perinatal androgens. Thus, factors affecting levels of perinatal androgens could have a significant impact on MC development and MC-associated disease risk across the life span.