T.K. designed the study, performed experiments, analyzed and interpreted data and wrote the manuscript; B.W., X.L. and H.W. performed experiments; T.C. and N.M.M. interpreted data and critically reviewed the paper; G.H. conceived and designed the study, supervised research, interpreted data, and wrote the manuscript.

*Correspondence: University of Pennsylvania, Penn Dental Medicine, Department of Basic and Translational Sciences, Laboratory of Innate Immunity and Inflammation, 240 S. 40th Street, Philadelphia, PA 19104-6030; Tel. 215-898-2091; Fax. 215-8385; geoh@upenn.edu

β2 integrins mediate neutrophil-endothelial adhesion and recruitment of neutrophils to sites of inflammation. The diminished expression of β2 integrins in patients with mutations in the ITGB2 (CD18) gene (leukocyte adhesion deficiency-Type 1; LAD1) results in few or no neutrophils in peripheral tissues. In the periodontium, neutrophil paucity is associated with upregulation of interleukin (IL)-23 and IL-17, which drive inflammatory bone loss. Using a relevant mouse model, we investigated whether diminished efferocytosis (owing to neutrophil scarcity) is associated with LAD1 periodontitis pathogenesis and aimed to develop approaches to restore the missing efferocytosis signals. We first showed that CD18−/− mice phenocopied human LAD1 in terms of IL-23/IL-17-driven inflammatory bone loss. Antibody-mediated blockade of c-Mer tyrosine kinase (Mer), a major efferocytic receptor, mimicked LAD1-associated upregulation of gingival IL-23 and IL-17 mRNA expression in wild-type (WT) mice. Consistently, soluble Mer-Fc reversed the inhibitory effect of efferocytosis on IL-23 expression in LPS-activated macrophages. Adoptive transfer of WT neutrophils to CD18−/− mice downregulated IL-23 and IL-17 expression to normal levels, but not when CD18−/− mice were treated with blocking anti-Mer antibody. Synthetic agonist-induced activation of liver X receptors (LXR) and peroxisome proliferator-activated receptors (PPAR), which link efferocytosis to generation of homeostatic signals, inhibited the expression of IL-23 and IL-17 and favorably affected the bone levels of CD18−/− mice. Therefore, our data link diminished efferocytosis-associated signaling due to impaired neutrophil recruitment to dysregulation of the IL-23–IL-17 axis and, moreover, suggest LXR and PPAR as potential therapeutic targets for treating LAD1 periodontitis.