CVA and MJT conceived and supervised the study. JH, MJT, and CVA drafted the paper and figures. JH and YZ carried out the primary analysis. CVA, MSE, and KS carried out patient recruitment. JH, JLF, PZ, and TGS processed tissues and carried out flow cytometry and FACS. JH and TGS extracted the DNA for bulk TCR sequencing. SY provided dermatopathology expertise and assisted with IHC analysis. FWK carried out scRNA and scTCR library preparation and sequencing. CC, YZ, and AM provided bioinformatic support. CVA, KS and JB collated the clinical data. JG provided statistical support. MJT provided scientific and infrastructural support. All authors reviewed and edited the final paper.

Corresponding Authors: Mary Jo Turk, PhD, Geisel School of Medicine at Dartmouth, One Medical Center Drive, Lebanon, NH 03756, 603-653-3549, mary.jo.turk@dartmouth.edu, Christina V. Angeles, MD, University of Michigan, Rogel Cancer Center, 1500 E. Medical Center Drive, 6219 Cancer Center, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, 734-615-4823, angelesc@med.umich.edu

While T-cell responses to cancer immunotherapy have been avidly studied, long-lived memory has been poorly characterized. In a cohort of metastatic melanoma survivors with exceptional responses to immunotherapy, we probed memory CD8+ T-cell responses across tissues, and across several years. Single-cell RNA sequencing revealed three subsets of resident memory T (TRM) cells shared between tumors and distant vitiligo-affected skin. Paired T-cell receptor sequencing further identified clonotypes in tumors that co-existed as TRM in skin and as effector memory T (TEM) cells in blood. Clonotypes that dispersed throughout tumor, skin, and blood preferentially expressed a IFNG / TNF-high signature, which had a strong prognostic value for melanoma patients. Remarkably, clonotypes from tumors were found in patient skin and blood up to nine years later, with skin maintaining the most focused tumor-associated clonal repertoire. These studies reveal that cancer survivors can maintain durable memory as functional, broadly-distributed TRM and TEM compartments.