This is an open access article under the terms of the http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ License, which permits use and distribution in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited, the use is non‐commercial and no modifications or adaptations are made.

Inflammation is a key process in antimicrobial defence and tissue repair, and failure to properly regulate inflammation can result in tissue damage and death. Neural circuits play important roles throughout the course of an inflammatory response, and the neurophysiological and molecular mechanisms are only partly understood. Here, we review key evidence for the neural regulation of inflammation and discuss emerging technologies to further map and harness this neurophysiology, a cornerstone in the rapidly evolving field of inflammation neuroscience.

A growing mechanistic understanding of the functional organisation of immune‐regulating reflexes has enabled the use of electrical interfaces with the peripheral nervous system for the study and the treatment of inflammatory diseases. Here, we review neural circuits that regulate inflammation, discuss technologies for activation of peripheral nerves and provide some perspectives on clinical translation.

The nervous system plays a key role in the regulation of many physiological functions of importance for virtually all organs and tissues. Observations in the 1990s provided convincing support that peripheral nerves are involved in monitoring and regulating the physiological response to injury and infection. A key observation was the absence of a fever response in vagotomised rats injected with a low dose of interleukin (IL)‐1 intraperitoneally. This discovery identified the vagus nerve as an important conduit for information on peripheral inflammation to the central nervous system.

More evidence of a reflex circuit involved in immune regulation that includes afferent and efferent peripheral nerves emerged with the observation that IL‐1 injected into the portal vein in rats resulted in increased motor activity in the splenic nerve, but only if the hepatic branch of the vagus nerve was left intact.

Subsequently, it was discovered that electrical or pharmacological activation of components in a cytokine‐regulating circuit, now designated the ‘inflammatory reflex’, reduces the release of pro‐inflammatory cytokines in inflammation through mechanisms that involve the vagus nerve, cholinergic and adrenergic nerves and receptors, T cells, macrophages and other immune cells.

Collectively, these discoveries have initiated the field of ‘inflammation neuroscience’ focused on the fundamental mechanisms in the neural regulation of immunity and ‘bioelectronic medicine’, spearheading translation of this knowledge into novel potential clinical approaches in prevention, monitoring and treatment of a possibly wide range of diseases.

Inflammation neuroscience is the convergence of molecular medicine, neuroscience, engineering and computing to study the fundamental mechanisms of the neural regulation of inflammation and immunity. Bioelectronic medicine is the translational and clinical application of using electronic devices to interface with the peripheral nervous system to target molecular mechanisms for the treatment of disease.

Historically, the immune and nervous systems have been studied independently, but it is now evident that there are a number of overlapping and complex processes that regulate both initiation and resolution of immune responses. Consider the typical clinical course of stroke: Patients often develop systemic immunosuppression

This connection between the brain, the peripheral nervous system and the immune system provides a structure to tune and coordinate immune responses to challenges. While the specific peripheral neuronal pathways during immune conditioning are yet incompletely understood, more is known about the peripheral autonomic nervous system in the context of neuro‐immune crosstalk. The sympathetic and the parasympathetic nervous systems play distinct roles in the regulation of immune activity. The sympathetic nervous system has a capacity to exert both local and systemic control, by direct innervation and systemic neurotransmitter release, respectively. Examples include activation of β2 adrenergic receptors on immune cells with increased cAMP levels that suppresses NF‐kB nuclear translocation and leads to inhibition of pro‐inflammatory cytokine synthesis

Communication between the nervous system and the immune system. (a) Adrenergic innervation reaches the vast majority of the body, including immune organ. Noradrenaline, acting through α‐ or β‐adrenergic receptors on immune cells, has numerous immunomodulatory effects; either promoting or limiting the release of pro‐inflammatory mediators and inducing a shift in adaptive immune responses. (b) The neurotransmitter acetylcholine, derived from cholinergic nerves or ACh‐producing B and T cells, limits the release of pro‐inflammatory mediators and immune cell recruitment. (c) Sensory neurons can detect pro‐inflammatory mediators and noxious stimuli in the periphery. Signals are transmitted to the CNS as well as in an axonal reflex, leading to the release of neuropeptides stimulating extensive local immunomodulatory effects. Parts of this image were modified from SMART (Servier Medical Art), licensed under a Creative Common Attribution 3.0 Generic License.

(Figure 1b). The vagus nerve is one of the most extensively studied components of the parasympathetic nervous system, and it plays a central role in the inflammatory reflex. Composed of an efferent and afferent arc, the vagus nerve can sense cytokines in the periphery and respond through an efferent release of ACh that regulates immune responses and inhibit inflammation.

Sensory neurons that innervate barrier tissues such as the skin, gut and lungs participate in the autonomic regulation of inflammation. Many sensory nerve fibres are found in close proximity to immune cells and exert local immunomodulatory effects through the release of neuropeptides

(Figure 1c). In cutaneous infections, sensory transient receptor potential ion channel‐positive (TRPV1+) and/or voltage‐gated sodium channel‐positive (Nav1.8+) neurons regulate immune responses. Activation of TRPV1+ neurons in the skin elicited a local response type 17 immune response in the absence of tissue damage or pathogen‐associated stimuli.

A similar physiology was also observed in Candida albicans skin infections where TRPV1+ neurons, the neuropeptide calcitonin gene‐related peptide (CGRP), CD301b+ dermal dendritic cells and dermal γδ T cells interact and promote a local type 17 immune response.

Importantly, while necessary for effective protection against invading pathogens, activation of sensory reflexes can also promote excessive inflammation. For instance, in an experimental model of allergic airway inflammation, immune cell‐derived IL‐5 promoted the release of the neuropeptide vasoactive intestinal peptide (VIP) from nociceptive neurons, which in turn induced the production of T helper 2 (Th2)‐type cytokines from CD4+ T cells. Additionally, Th2‐type cells also have the capacity to secrete VIP upon antigen stimulation,

While these observations would indicate that sensory neuron activation promotes and occasionally exacerbates inflammatory responses in barrier tissues, neuropeptides have context‐dependent effects, both pro‐ and anti‐inflammatory (Figure 1c). For example, innate lymphoid cells (ILCs), a subset of immune cells abundant in barrier tissues, can respond to CGRP with lower proliferation and reduced IL‐13 production, leading to reduced airway inflammation and magnitude of innate type 2 responses after helminth infections.

It is clear that crosstalk between nerves and immune cells in barrier tissues is extensive and that neuropeptides can act both to promote and to inhibit inflammation, depending on context. Specific immune cells respond to distinct neurotransmitters released by both sensory and motor neurons and other cells. A number of reviews explore this topic in greater detail.

Taken together, there are numerous pathways for neuro‐immune crosstalk in the periphery. While insights into these neuro‐immune interactions provide an improved understanding of immune responses and potentially an entire array of new treatment modalities for diseases characterised by excessive inflammation, there are still major gaps in our understanding of inflammation neuroscience. A more complete understanding of this physiology will require mapping of the neurophysiology of inflammation in vivo.

A cornerstone of therapy development in modern medicine is understanding the detailed cellular‐ and molecular‐specific disease‐associated mechanisms. Current evidence demonstrates that different subpopulations of neurons play different roles in the inflammatory response, but a comprehensive map of these signals is lacking. Recent data demonstrate that specific combinations of pulse width, pulse amplitude and frequency for electrical activation of the cervical vagus nerve can decrease or increase systemic cytokine levels, also in the absence of inflammation.

Pulse width appears to be an important parameter, variation of which was reported to switch between attenuation and augmentation of cytokine release. A plausible explanation of this finding is that different stimulation protocols recruit selective but divergent sets of neurons, activation of which promotes a distinct immune response. Accordingly, it is possible that vagus nerve stimulation may be utilised not only for reducing the release of pro‐inflammatory cytokines such as TNF but also for a more detailed fine‐tuning of systemic immune responses in a variety of settings in health and disease.

Considering these observations, the electrophysiology and anatomy of immune‐regulating neural circuits should be mapped in detail to adequately plan experimental treatments in models of inflammatory diseases and any clinical interventions. Mapping the anatomy and decoding electrical signatures of the vagus nerve – and other conduits that regulate immune system function – to potentially create both an atlas and a dictionary for the neural signals that regulate inflammation are therefore very much of interest. With an atlas of the involved neural reflexes, it is conceivable to use bioelectronic medicine to address one of the common major shortcomings of pharmaceuticals, that is the common lack of anatomical target specificity. While the relatively painstaking traditional methods using mono‐ and poly‐synaptic tracing provide key information on innervation and specifics on potential neuro‐immune interactions, this work is still in its infancy. In fact, the details of nerve–immune cell interactions are not established even in the extensively studied inflammatory reflex, let alone in other contexts. However, the development of reporter mice specific for subpopulations of neurons and methods for specific virus‐based neural barcoding promise to enable identification and tracing of individual neurons in the body.

An interesting prospect is to regulate immunity by the use of electrical nerve stimulation for activation of select nerves. The use of electricity in medicine dates back to year 47 CE in Mesopotamia, where live torpedo fish were used to treat headaches, arthritis and gout.

The early applications of peripheral nerve stimulation were based on adaptations of surgical techniques and stimulators used in the CNS. The paddle‐type, multicontact electrodes, used for peripheral nerve stimulation in the 1980s, were developed for CNS use, and the perceived need for electrode optimisation for peripheral nerves was low. However, following the breakthrough of percutaneous electrode placement techniques,

interest was sparked in electrode optimisation and precipitated the development of smaller electrodes with decreased implantation risk and improved tissue interface longevity, and without a requirement for transcutaneous wires. Extra‐neural interfaces, such as hook or cuff electrodes,

have the benefit of leaving nerves intact, but usually target several bundles of axons or fascicles at the same time, significantly limiting selectivity. Higher selectivity can be achieved by penetration of the nerve to access fibres of a single or multiple fascicles,

A number of technologies and approaches have been considered to develop the localised stimulation and to enable high‐quality mechanistic studies of peripheral nerve activation. A list of nerve stimulation strategies and practical/technical considerations can be found in Table 1. Of note, much of the mechanistic understanding of electrical nerve stimulation for the neural regulation of inflammation originates from studies in acute or relatively short‐term mouse models. A reason for the widespread use of mice is that genetic mouse models provide informative, well‐characterised and convenient platforms to study mechanism, but suitable technology for studies in chronic models is largely lacking, which is a significant barrier to progress with inflammation neuroscience in well‐characterised genetic models of chronic disease.

Long‐term electrical stimulation of peripheral nerves in mice is not trivial. The development of peripheral nerve interfaces has to consider the physiological and anatomical aspects of nerve size, shape, complexity and composition. For example, the mouse cervical vagus nerve, a relatively large nerve in the mouse, only has a diameter of approximately 100 micrometres and it is difficult to attach an electrode and wires that will stay functional as the mice move around and exhibit their normal, social behaviour.

but the technology is not yet widespread or established. A particular concern is maintaining lead connections over time in freely moving and interacting mice. One solution to this latter problem is to use untethered devices, which also reduces the risk of infection.

Several approaches have been tested in order to achieve non‐invasive stimulation of select peripheral nerves. Successful activation of the splenic nerve using focused ultrasound was reported, for example in a mouse model of inflammatory arthritis, but this method is technically challenging for use in experimental models of chronic inflammation.

Ultrasound in clinical practice is often highly operator‐dependent for performance and precision. This shortcoming might potentially be mitigated by instead using ultrasound as an energy source for activation of previously implanted electrodes at specific target nerves, but this approach requires prior surgery.

Another method for nerve stimulation involves optogenetics, which is very attractive for its potential specificity in targeting subpopulations of nerve fibres in genetic mouse models. It is widely used and has contributed significantly to furthering our understanding of reflex neurophysiology, including in the regulation of immunity.

However, because of the complicated nature of the technology involved in optogenetic stimulation, it is not yet well suited for studies of chronic conditions with repeated stimulation over longer periods of time. Furthermore, strategies involving magnetic materials are interesting and appear promising, including the possibility of ‘magnetogenetics’ – a concept in which a single protein responsive to a magnetic field is introduced/expressed and in that way may offer similar specificity as optogenetics.

In yet another approach, specificity in nerve activation is achieved by the use of artificially designer receptors exclusively activated by designer drugs (DREADDs) – introduced proteins or enzymes that respond to exogenous drugs and cause activation in only a defined subset of nerves.

An interesting development uses a hybrid approach with surgical implantation of photocapacitors on target nerves and transcutaneous transmission of far‐red light for subsequent nerve activation. This technology may provide a path forward to realise reproducible nerve stimulation sustainable in genetic models of chronic diseases.

might be an interesting option for peripheral nerve stimulation, and enable the study of the mechanistically very informative genetic mouse models. These methods, perhaps in combination, are promising tools for improving our insights on the neural regulation of inflammation.

Pre‐clinical disease models have shown that vagus nerve stimulation (VNS) is potentially a supplementary, if not alternative, treatment modality in conditions and diseases such as sepsis, ischaemia/reperfusion injury, rheumatoid arthritis (RA) and inflammatory bowel disease.

As the technology of peripheral nerve stimulation develops and the understanding of the underlying molecular mechanisms are mapped, new treatment modalities may become available for autoimmune and other human diseases. A fascinating prospect is the possibility to measure and potentially decode electrical activity in peripheral nerves as a measurement of local inflammation. There are already reports that suggest that it is possible,

can help personalise the treatment of the notoriously variable clinical symptoms that are common in chronic inflammatory diseases. Continuous recording of key physiological indicators, such as a cytokine level, and activity in inflammation‐sensing nerves might provide information that enables frequent adjustments of therapeutic intensity, that is activity of, for example, a vagus nerve stimulator. Analogous to the way insulin is dosed based on physiological readouts such as blood glucose in diabetes, it might be possible to continuously adjust the dose of anti‐inflammatory nerve stimulation based on physiological measurements, be it nerve activity, cytokine levels, pain or other relevant variables. These enticing prospects certainly warrant intense work on mapping mechanisms and physiology in inflammation neuroscience.

Decades of work in inflammation neuroscience has provided compelling evidence that crosstalk between the nervous and immune system plays important roles in the regulation of inflammation, from initiation to resolution. Mechanistic insights on the peripheral nerve regulation of immunity have laid the groundwork for clinical studies using nerve stimulation to reduce the intensity of chronic inflammatory diseases. Clinical observations are encouraging and suggest that it may be possible to replace some anti‐inflammatory drugs with electric current and nerve stimulation to control and improve chronic inflammatory diseases.

While there is ample support for the neural regulation of inflammation, detailed mechanistic studies of the neurophysiology and molecular mechanisms that are key in the crosstalk between nerves and immune cells are somewhat lacking. Several interesting efforts to overcome these gaps are ongoing using a wide range of approaches, including optogenetics, magnetogenetics, DREADDs, photocapacitors and temporal interference. Progress is also being made in the development of recording electrodes and signal processing aimed at decoding inflammation‐associated sensory information in peripheral nerves, despite that the understanding of both the functional anatomy and physiology of the different reflex circuits is limited.

Going forward, the emerging technologies will be important to improve specificity in nerve interfaces in vivo, better delineate the functional anatomy and the electrophysiology of immune‐regulating neural circuits, and provide an ‘atlas and dictionary’ of neuro‐immune interactions. We postulate that future work in inflammation neuroscience will shed important light on the pathophysiology of excessive inflammation and inflammatory diseases, and likely provide novel insights on signals that promote resolution and healing. This new knowledge will be useful for developing and improving novel therapeutic approaches and perhaps enable the use of electrons to supplement or even substitute drugs.