This is an open access article under the terms of the http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ License, which permits use and distribution in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited, the use is non‐commercial and no modifications or adaptations are made.

Immune checkpoint inhibitors (ICIs) induce a durable response in a wide range of tumor types, but only a minority of patients outside these ‘responsive’ tumor types respond, with some totally resistant. The primary predictor of intrinsic immune resistance to ICIs is the complete or near‐complete absence of lymphocytes from the tumor, so‐called immunologically cold tumors. Here, we propose two broad approaches to convert ‘cold’ tumors into ‘hot’ tumors. The first is to induce immunogenic tumor cell death, through the use of oncolytic viruses or bacteria, conventional cancer therapies (e.g. chemotherapy or radiation therapy) or small molecule drugs. The second approach is to target the tumor microenvironment, and covers diverse options such as depleting immune suppressive cells; inhibiting transforming growth factor‐beta; remodelling the tumor vasculature or hypoxic environment; strengthening the infiltration and activation of antigen‐presenting cells and/or effector T cells in the tumor microenvironment with immune modulators; and enhancing immunogenicity through personalised cancer vaccines. Strategies that successfully modify cold tumors to overcome their resistance to ICIs represent mechanistically driven approaches that will ultimately result in rational combination therapies to extend the clinical benefits of immunotherapy to a broader cancer cohort.

In this review, we propose two broad approaches to convert ‘cold’ tumours into ‘hot’ tumours: targeting tumour cells, and remodelling the tumour microenvironment. Strategies that successfully modify cold tumours will ultimately result in rational combination therapies to extend the clinical benefits of immunotherapy to a broader cancer cohort.

in response to soluble, tumor‐derived immune suppressive factors, such as interleukin‐10 (IL‐10) and transforming growth factor‐β (TGF‐β). TIL ‘desertification’ is also caused by the loss or low expression of specific chemokines and their corresponding receptors, such as CXCR3 and its chemokine ligands CXCL9 and CXCL10,

In contrast, immunologically ‘hot’ tumors contain many infiltrating T cells (Figure 1b) whose implied antitumor activity is being held in check by immune checkpoints invoked either by the tumor or by the immunosuppressive tumor microenvironment (TME).

Therapeutic strategies to remodel immunogenically cold tumors. (a) Features of an immunologically cold tumor. (b) Representative fluorescent images showing the cold and hot head and neck tumors with T infiltration visualised by CD3+ T cells (green) and a tumor marker (magenta). (c) Two therapeutic strategies that focus on inducing immunogenic tumor cell death and targeting the tumor microenvironment to convert ‘cold’ tumors into ‘hot’ ones. TGF‐β: Transforming growth factor‐beta.

For decades, practitioners of immunotherapy operated under the presumption that the best way to unleash the power of the immune system on cancer was to make cancer cells more immunogenic, provoking an enormous number of studies that typically combined a putative tumor antigen and an adjuvant powerful enough to generate a T‐cell effector response, including cytokines,

Remarkably, about a decade ago, studies began to elicit some significant clinical responses in advanced cancers, such as disseminated melanoma and non‐small‐cell lung cancer, even without the administration of a tumor antigen. These successful studies utilised immune checkpoint inhibitors (ICIs), which are typically blocking antibodies directed against cytotoxic T‐lymphocyte‐associated protein 4 (CTLA4), programmed cell death protein 1 (PD‐1) or programmed cell death 1 ligand 1 (PD‐L1). This approach proved successful because it de‐repressed and greatly amplified a pre‐existing T‐cell response to the tumor. To support this concept, responses to ICIs have mostly been observed in immunologically ‘hot’ tumors: those with high pre‐existing immune response.

Frequently, responsive tumors also carried a high mutational burden that implied tumor ‘neoantigens’ were being generated, processed and presented as potential T‐cell targets; and increased PD‐L1 expression in cancer cells and/or antigen‐presenting cells (APCs), indicative of suppression of an otherwise potentially effective T‐cell response. ICIs have a broad impact on the immune system, many treated patients experience a discrete spectrum of adverse events known as immune‐related adverse events (irAEs),

Notwithstanding the often‐sizeable clinical problem of treating autoimmune manifestations of ICI, the most pressing challenge for cancer therapy has now understandably refocused on next‐generation therapeutic strategies to remodel 'cold' tumors into ‘hot’ ones, either prior to or coincident with ICI being administered. Attempts at improving immunogenicity have focused on improving immunogenicity in the tumor, reducing immunosuppression in the TME and enhancing T‐cell activation through utilising various approaches to: (1) target tumor cells, (2) target the TME or (3) augment immunity with presensitised adoptively transferred immune cells.

Antigenicity means that the tumor can generate antigen targets to which the host has not been tolerised. Given the genetic instability of many forms of cancer, antigenicity can be achieved via the expression of neoantigens, viral oncoproteins and overexpressed self‐antigens.

Tumor cell death that is associated with the release of DAMPs that bind to specific receptors on the surface of APCs to activate the antitumor immune response is referred to as ICD. Until recent years, ICD was often referred to as immunogenic apoptosis as the majority of ICD occur via apoptosis.

Enormous efforts have been made to induce the tumor itself to undergo ICD and thus activate antitumor immunity (Figure 2). These approaches have included (1) oncolytic viruses (OVs) or bacteria that selectively replicate in tumor cells, releasing soluble antigens and generating danger signals; (2) conventional cancer therapies (radiotherapy, chemotherapy and phototherapy) that induce DNA damage and generate a ‘vaccine pool’ of neoantigen in situ to initiate the immune response; and (3) small molecule drugs that target a cancer’s oncogenic pathways and/or positively influencing the TME.

The cancer immunity cycle and selective methods to increase tumor immunogenicity. Tumor antigens are released as cancer cells die and are captured by the antigen‐presenting dendritic cells in the tumor site, and further presented to T cells in the lymph node. T cells are activated and proliferate, and effector T cells traffic and infiltrate into the tumor site. Activated effector T cells recognise and kill the cancer cells. Oncolytic viruses/bacteria, conventional therapy and targeted therapies are able to induce immunogenic cell death. Personalised cancer vaccines typically comprise tumor‐associated antigens or tumor‐specific antigens in a vaccine vector (RNA, DNA, viral, bacteria, protein, peptide and antigen‐presenting cells) with an immune adjuvant. IFN, interferon; IL, interleukin; MHC, major histocompatibility complex; TCR, T‐cell receptor; TNF, tumor necrosis factor.

Advantages of DNA viruses include a large genome that can be edited without compromising replication, and high‐fidelity DNA polymerases that ensure the integrity of the viral genome. Conversely, the small genome of RNA viruses has limited ability to encode large transgenes. However, the smaller RNA viruses can go through the blood–brain barrier and potentially target the tumors in the central nervous system. Pre‐existing immune response to some RNA viruses is also less common, making them more suitable for systemic delivery.

; and the other is talimogene laherparepvec (T‐VEC), an attenuated herpes simplex virus type 1 (HSV‐1) that is engineered and approved for advanced, refractory melanoma. T‐VEC is engineered to improve antigen presentation and T‐cell priming by inserting the gene for human granulocyte–macrophage colony‐stimulating factor (GM‐CSF).

While intradermal BCG has been used for bladder cancer for several decades, more recent approval for T‐VEC was based on data from the pivotal phase III OPTiM trial, which demonstrated tumor control at certain anatomical sites and favorable tolerability.

investigated the effect of T‐VEC on immune cell infiltration and subsequent treatment efficacy of anti‐PD‐1 antibody in a phase 1b clinical trial. In 21 patients with advanced melanoma, tumor size decreased by 62%, while 33% experienced a complete response. Another virus to show promise in preclinical mouse models is the Maraba rhabdovirus, shown by Bourgeois‐Daigneault et al.

Other approaches utilise rotavirus, influenza or the yellow fever vaccines to elicit antitumor immunity and may potentially be quickly approved, given their extensively understood safety profile. For instance, when administered via intratumoral injection, the FDA‐approved unadjuvanted seasonal influenza vaccine could inhibit tumor growth by increasing the number of antitumor TILs and decreasing regulatory B cells in a mouse model.

This process creates systemic immune responses and sensitises tumors to subsequent ICIs. Importantly, intratumoral vaccination also generates protection against subsequent influenza virus lung infection. A recent study reported that pyroptosis‐induced inflammation initiates rigorous antitumor immunity and can synergise with ICIs.

A murine study demonstrated that by implanting Gasdermin E‐positive B16 melanoma cells, mice were protected from subsequent challenge with wild‐type B16 cells. This was because of the pyroptosis of Gasdermin E‐positive B16 melanoma cells, which enhanced antitumor immunity through tumor‐associated macrophages, tumor‐infiltrating natural killer (NK) and cytotoxic T‐lymphocyte (CTL) cells.

Radiotherapy is a major treatment option for many cancer patients. In addition to mediating DNA damage‐induced cancer cell death, radiotherapy can modulate tumor immunogenicity by activating the cyclic guanosine monophosphate–adenosine monophosphate synthase (cyclic GMP‐AMP synthase) – stimulator of interferon gene (cGAS‐STING) pathway.

However, overall radiotherapy dose and fraction must be cautiously tuned, as high doses of radiation can attenuate STING activation and even damage TILs recruited to the irradiated organ. Preclinical data suggest that moderately hypofractionated radiotherapy offers the best chance of favorable immunomodulation.

A recent report on utility of a in situ vaccine, combining Fms‐like tyrosine kinase 3 ligand (Flt3L), radiotherapy and a Toll‐like receptors (TLR)‐3 agonist, demonstrated systemic clinical tumor regression through recruitment, antigen loading and activation of intratumoral, cross‐presenting DCs.

Ultimately, the interplay between multiple variables including radiotherapy dose, fractionation, schedule and choice of systemic immune mediator will all need to be considered, and carefully evaluated in preclinical and translationally focused clinical trials.

Chemotherapy may elicit antitumor immunity via three main mechanisms: the 'on‐target' or direct impact on tumor cells that induce their immunogenicity; the 'off‐target' effects on different immune cell subsets; and impact on whole‐body physiology that reshape antitumor immunosurveillance.

: chemotherapeutic agents are usually strongly cytotoxic and eliminate tumor cells that might otherwise present neoantigens generated by DNA damage. In any event, new chemotherapy‐induced mutations tend to be limited as treatment generally applied to established cancers, potential exceptions being chemotherapy given in an adjuvant setting. Interestingly, ICI combined with chemotherapy is associated with a high risk of adverse events,

as ICIs are known to have a distinct toxicity profile from that caused by conventional chemotherapy. ICI‐related adverse events are identified as irAEs and occur commonly in skin, gut, lung, skeletal muscle and various endocrine organs including the pituitary gland.

While advert events are increased in patients treated with chemotherapy and ICI, to date there are no in vivo mechanistic studies exploring this issue. It is possible that this combination treatment is particularly effective at breaking peripheral immune tolerance; however, this remains to be proven. Despite this, combined chemotherapy and ICI has become the standard of care and is under continual refinement for patients with breast, non‐small‐cell lung cancer, colorectal, gastric, gastro‐oesophageal carcinoma or some lymphomas.

further investigated the combination of PTT agent IR820 and indoleamine 2,3‐dioxygenase (IDO) inhibitor 1‐methyl‐tryptophan (1MT), which evoked a helpful immune response against tumor metastasis and recurrence. These data provide a promising alternative to transform a 'cold' tumor into a 'hot' one. High‐intensity focused ultrasound (HIFU) is a non‐invasive therapy that is used in the clinic to thermally ablate solid tumors with high spatial precision,

recently demonstrated a combination of HIFU and ICI significantly enhanced systemic antitumor responses and cured the majority of mice with large, established unilateral and bilateral neuroblastoma tumors. Most interestingly, a significant abscopal effect was observed using HIFU, suggesting a long‐term memory response. These studies provide proof‐of‐concept data for using HIFU to stimulate systemic immunity that may act as an adjuvant to ICI therapy.

demonstrated CDK4/6 inhibitors enhanced tumor antigen presentation through stimulation of type III IFN production, as well as suppressed regulatory T‐cell (Treg) proliferation. These data indicate CDK4/6 inhibitors are able to boost tumor immunogenicity

and might have a synergistic effect with ICIs. As CDK4/6 inhibitors have already been approved for breast cancer, and they act synergistically with anti‐PD‐1 therapy in mouse models, the findings demonstrate the potential of combining CDK4/6 and ICIs in clinical trials.

The mitogen‐activated protein kinase (MAPK) kinase (MEK) pathway is frequently up‐regulated in various human solid tumors. A recent study showed that MAPK activity could suppress the expression of MHC‐I and MHC‐II, and tumor cells can evade antigen presentation through activating the MAPK pathway in TNBC.

These results offer a rational therapeutic strategy linking inhibitors targeting the BRAF‐MAPK pathway with cancer immunotherapy. A recent phase 1b clinical trial demonstrated MEK inhibitor, cobimetinib, in combination with anti‐PD‐L1, atezolizumab, had manageable safety and clinical activity in cold tumors, irrespective of KRAS or BRAF status.

A third example comes in the form of agents that block the DNA damage response, whose normal function is to ensure genome integrity, but which can act to preserve cancer cell viability. Therapeutic inhibition of DNA damage response with agents such as poly (ADP‐ribose) polymerase (PARP) inhibitors has improved clinical benefits for BRCA‐mutated tumors.

The second major strategy to amplify antitumor immunity is to target the TME, so as to facilitate an immune response to the cancer cells embedded within it. As the TME is almost always suppressive for T‐cell responses, such efforts typically include inhibiting immune suppressive cells, such as Tregs and myeloid‐derived suppressive cells (MDSCs); decreasing the expression or the effects of intensely immune suppressive molecules such as TGF‐β; using immune modulators to enhance the recruitment, trafficking and activity of APCs and TILs; and reversing adverse metabolic factors such as hypoxia by remodelling the tumor vasculature or other means.

that impede the local immune response. Certain molecular signalling pathways were shared between Tregs, MDSCs and immune effector cells; hence, it poses a significant challenge to specifically target Tregs or MDSCs without compromising a variety of immune effector cells in the TME.

all of which have shown promising effects in preclinical studies and progressed to clinical trials. Galunisertib is the most promising small molecule inhibitor, targeting the TGF‐βRI kinase. The most extensively studied antibody, fresolimumab (GC1008), which sequesters all isoforms of TGF‐β, has also progressed to clinical trials.

However, both small molecules and antibodies have had little clinical impact. By contrast, receptor‐based TGF‐β traps appear to hold greater promise. Bintrafusp alfa (M7824) is an innovative first‐in‐class bifunctional fusion protein composed of an IgG1 PD‐L1 antibody and the extracellular domain of the human TGF‐β receptor II (TGF‐βRII or TGF‐β trap).

Stromal cells within the TME also play a key role in inhibiting immune responses to support tumor growth. The extracellular matrix produced by CAFs hinders the immune response via blocking TIL infiltration, compressing tumor blood vessels and inducing hypoxia.

found that, compared with patients receiving ipilimumab alone, those who received combination therapy had substantially higher infiltration of effector T cells and macrophages in their tumor, and increased circulating memory T cells. The combination of pembrolizumab and axitinib for advanced renal cell carcinoma was assessed in a phase III study.

reported that the hypoxia‐activated prodrug TH‐302 caused an influx of T cells into hypoxic zones and significantly reduced MDSC density. Consistent with these observations, combining the hypoxia/prodrug and ICIs cured more than 80% of mice with experimental prostate cancer.

These findings suggest that targeted hypoxia reduction may restore antitumor immune responses and resensitise hypoxic tumors to ICIs. A further adverse effect of tumor hypoxia is that cancer cell consumption of adenosine triphosphate (ATP) is accelerated, significantly increasing the production of adenosine diphosphate (ADP) in the TME.

In turn, ADP is reduced to potently immunosuppressive free adenosine through the action of cancer cell surface exoenzymes such as CD39 and CD73 induced by the hypoxia, in effect, a ‘vicious cycle’ of events. Adenosine binding (through receptors with various isoforms) adversely affects virtually every facet of humoral and cellular immunity, and binding to the A2A isoform expressed on TILs dampens IFN‐γ secretion and CTL/NK cytotoxicity. Beavis et al.

CD40 is broadly expressed on a wide range of immune cells, such as DCs, B cells and macrophages. It is a cell surface member of the TNF receptor superfamily and plays a major role in activating and licensing DCs to prime effective T cells and re‐educate macrophages.

Five families of PRRs have been reported: Toll‐like receptors (TLRs), nucleotide‐binding oligomerisation domain (NOD)‐like receptors (NLRs), C‐type lectin receptors (CLRs), RIG‐I‐like receptors (RLRs) and cytosolic DNA sensors (CDSs). The immunostimulatory characteristics of PRRs can alter the immune suppressive TME and prompt the activation of APCs, driving tumor‐specific T‐cell responses. Studies have shown that PRRs agonists can activate antigen presentation through resident myeloid cells in the TME.

recently demonstrated intratumoral administration of TLR 7/8 agonist 3M052 was able to induce a T‐cell‐inflamed TME and suppress lung metastasis in preclinical TNBC. However, depending on the TLR and the tumor type studied, TLR agonists showed apparently contradictory results by either promoting or suppressing tumor progression in preclinical studies.

Thus, STING agonists may potentially boost de novo innate and subsequent adaptive immune responses, and have the potential to transform the therapeutic landscape if optimised. The first STING agonist investigated in the immunotherapy field was the molecule DMXAA. DMXAA showed antitumor activity in preclinical models but was subsequently demonstrated to activate mouse, but not human, STING.

these agents induce inflammatory cytokines with little specificity when administered systemically in mouse cancer models. This feature restricts their application in clinical trials to direct intratumoral injection and, as a result, limits their potential use to a narrow set of tumors. Thus, STING agonists that are suitable for systemic administration are needed. A small number of intravenously administered STING agonists have recently begun evaluation in clinical trials (NCT03843359, NCT04420884 and NCT04096638). Undoubtedly, non‐nucleotide small molecule STING agonist that can be administrated systemically is the next focus of STING agonist development, providing this can be done safely at a therapeutic dose, given the expected immune activation with such an approach. Recent studies reported by Pan et al.

Indoleamine‐pyrrole 2,3‐dioxygenase (IDO)‐1 catalyses the conversion of amino acid tryptophan to kynurenine, which then suppresses immune effector function and activates suppressive immune cells. Preclinical studies demonstrated that IDO1 inhibitors alleviate the suppression of CTL and NK cells.

It has been hypothesised that as immune‐metabolic adjuvants, IDO‐1 inhibitors may exert little effect on their own, but may extend the efficacy of ICIs. Unfortunately, combining anti‐PD1 with epacadostat, a selective IDO‐1 inhibitor, did not improve progression‐free or overall survival over anti‐PD1 monotherapy in advanced melanoma.

observed that tumor MHC‐I expression was increased, along with T‐cell infiltration and PD‐L1 expression when systemic IFN‐γ was given at weekly intervals. These data suggest that systemic IFN‐γ may potentially convert cold tumors into ‘hot’ tumors and work in concert with ICI therapy.

Other immune cytokines, such as IL‐2, IL‐12, IL‐7, IFN‐γ and tumor necrosis factor (TNF), are able to mediate the recruitment and expansion of lymphocytes within the tumor. The strategy of activating these cytokines specifically at the tumor site to maximise their effects while reducing systematic toxicity has been challenging, high‐dose IL‐2 having been administered to patients for close to 40 years.

Some of these approaches combine an antibody targeting a tumor antigen with a modified cytokine. Cergutuzumab amunaleukin is a CEA‐targeted immune cytokine, which comprises a single IL‐2 variant moiety with abolished CD25 binding and a carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA)‐specific antibody (CEA‐IL2v).

One major challenge facing immune modulators, especially cytokines and immune agonists, is unacceptable systemic toxicity, which may in part be avoided by intratumoral administration. STING or TLR agonists are currently being evaluated in this way, although systemic toxicity is not completely eliminated. An alternative is to use a prodrug approach. NKTR‐214 is a recombinant human IL‐2 preparation that is masked with polyethylene glycol (PEG). It becomes active only when the PEG chains are hydrolysed

Cancer vaccines usually comprise soluble TAAs or tumor‐specific antigens (e.g. oncogenic viral or neoantigens) in a vaccine vector (e.g. protein or peptide‐based, nucleic acid‐based, viral or bacterial vector‐based or cell‐based) combined with immune adjuvants (e.g. TLR agonist, CD40 agonist, STING agonist or GM‐CSF) (Figure 2).

: first, identify the available mutations through whole‐exome sequencing (WES) and narrow the spectrum to expressed genes via RNA sequencing (RNA‐seq); second, DNA from normal tissue is used to determine the human leucocyte antigen (HLA), and neoepitopes are ranked for binding to the patient’s HLA alloforms; and third,, validated epitopes are incorporated into a personalised cancer vaccine with an immune adjuvant and administered to patients.

These studies demonstrated that the approach is feasible, is safe and induces strong neoepitope‐specific T‐cell‐dependent immune responses, encouraging accelerated development of this approach. Hepatocellular cancer (HCC) is also being evaluated in a randomised European multi‐centre phase I/II clinical trial.

In addition, generating effective immunity against tumors with a relatively low mutational load, such as glioblastoma (GBM) and virtually all paediatric cancers, is another challenge. Despite this, a phase I clinical trial testing multi‐epitope, personalised neoantigen vaccination in GBM recently reported increased TIL infiltration with enriched memory phenotype.

As suggested above, HLA epitope prediction is a critical challenge for cancer vaccine development, as current algorithms have limited predictive power. Recently, performance improvement has been achieved in this field. To predict HLA class I peptide presentation across a large fraction of the population, Sarkizova et al.

eluted 95 HLA‐A, HLA‐B, HLA‐C and HLA‐G mono‐allelic cell lines and profiled more than 185 000 peptides using mass spectrometry. They identified canonical peptides, and unique and shared binding submotifs for each HLA alloform, and other motifs whose presentation varied with peptide length.

Combining these vaccines with other approaches such as inhibiting immune suppressive molecules, depleting immune suppressive cells and blocking immune checkpoints is also proceeding. Recent studies have shown that synergistic or additive effects can be observed between ICIs and cancer vaccines.

Having moved beyond the first critical hurdle of clinical development, future studies on personalised neoantigen vaccines will focus on neoantigen prediction; manufacturing efficiencies, turnaround time and affordability; and identifying the most suitable clinical settings for this approach.

The idea of targeting the non‐mutated TAAs is fascinating as certain solid tumor types have low mutational burden. And even in melanoma, which is considered to have a high mutation rate, a significant proportion of patients harbour only a moderate‐to‐low mutational burden.

Investigators and clinicians in the field of immuno‐oncology are now armed with a considerable range of approaches to address the intrinsic immune resistance of cold tumors. The main challenge now is how to rationally combine and dose these many options to maximise therapeutic impact and understand what is being achieved pharmacodynamically while minimising off‐target effects. A necessary prerequisite for success is to more comprehensively understand tumor–immune interactions across the gamut of clinical cancer development – not only is each case unique at the time of presentation, but the interplay between cancer and host immunity is bound to have been shaped by the immunomodulatory mutations cancer accumulates over time. Understanding the dynamic changes in cancer immunity as a result of previous therapies is also of utmost importance. High‐resolution analyses, such as single‐cell sequencing and high‐dimensional cell phenotyping, are now enabling the capture of various immune cells in the TME and determination of their molecular and functional status. To capture the dynamic changes in cellular composition and functional status, both baseline and on‐treatment biopsies are in need.

In this review, we have outlined many possible strategies to remodel immunologically cold tumors and sensitise them to ICIs; the potential promise of each is counterbalanced by limitations for clinical translation. Given the countless possibilities, we believe a reasonable starting point is to focus on extending sometimes remarkable benefits currently enjoyed by a minority of patients treated with ICIs to a broader patient population. One reasonable way to assess progress and track potential success is to build approaches that make ‘cold’ tumors progressively ‘warmer’. We trust this review opens new possibilities and encourages the rational design of such therapeutic interventions.

PJN received research grants from Roche/Genentech, BMS, Allergan, Compugen and Juno/Celgene, outside the submitted work. JD reports research support from Roche Genentech, Lilly, Astra Zeneca, BeiGene, Novartis, Bristol‐Myers Squibb and GlaxoSmithKline, and consulting fees from Amgen, Eisai and Pierre‐Fabre. The authors have no other conflicts of interest to declare.

The authors acknowledge long‐term funding support from the National Health and Medical Research Council (NHMRC) of Australia and Cancer Council Victoria, in the form of many Program, Project, Venture and Fellowship grants over the past 20 years. JAT and PJN are also very grateful to the Peter MacCallum Cancer Foundation for generous philanthropic support. In particular, JAT is a Rosie Lew Fellow of the Foundation. SW thanks the Hudson Institute of Medical Research for the support. The figures included in this paper were created with BioRender.com.

et al. Randomized phase 3 trial of interferon γ‐1b plus standard carboplatin/paclitaxel versus carboplatin/paclitaxel alone for first‐line treatment of advanced ovarian and primary peritoneal carcinomas: results from a prospectively designed analysis of progression‐free survival. Gynecol Oncol