The occurrence of microorganisms has been confirmed in the tumor microenvironment (TME) of many different organs. Microorganisms (e.g., phage, virus, bacteria, fungi, and protozoa) present in TME modulate TME to inhibit or promote tumor growth in species-dependent manners due to the special physiological and pathological features of each microorganism. Such microorganism-TME interactions have recently been emulated to turn microorganisms into powerful cancer theranostic agents. To facilitate scientists to explore microorganisms-TME interactions further to develop improved cancer theranostics, here we critically review the characteristics of different microorganisms that can be found in TME, their interactions with TME, and their current applications in cancer diagnosis and therapy. Clinical trials of using microorganisms for cancer theranostics are also summarized and discussed. Moreover, the emerging technology of whole-metagenome sequencing that can be employed to precisely determine microbiota spectra is described. Such technology enables scientists to gain an in-depth understanding of the species and distributions of microorganisms in TME. Therefore, scientists now have new tools to identify microorganisms (either naturally present in or introduced into TME) that can be used as effective probes, monitors, vaccines, or drugs for potentially advancing cancer theranostics to clinical applications.

Cancer has been reported as one of the leading causes of death and a monster that tortures the quality of life worldwide in the 21st century 1. Urgency has been coming out since its diagnosis and therapy remain challenging. For centuries, the knowledge of tumor microenvironment (TME) stands for the interaction of cancer cells and the milieu networks around them, providing insights for understanding how the heterogeneous cells generate, proliferate, migrate, develop and even invade or contaminate normal cells in nature 2. Recently, numerous studies have demonstrated that microorganisms play pivotal roles in forming and changing TME and developing cancer theranostics 3.

Microorganisms include all kinds of microbiota such as bacteria, viruses, phages, protozoa, and fungi 4. Great evidence has been presented to highlight the impacts of microorganisms in physiological and pathological features, such as metabolism, inflammation, and immunity 5. Traditional ideas mainly focus on the dysbiosis of microorganisms and their nosogenetic impacts of inducing a variety of diseases, including but not restricted to rheumatoid arthritis 6, HIV 7, Parkinson's disease 8, liver cirrhosis 9, inflammatory bowel disease 10, graft-versus-host disease 11, type 2 diabetes mellitus 12 and different kinds of cancer 13. However, the advantages of microorganisms have been ignited up by recent findings and current strategies. Symbiotic microorganisms live commensally in bodies and modulate health and development from prenatal to postnatal periods through microbiota-host interactions 14. There are trillions of commensal microorganisms naturally existing in skin 15, lung 16, oral cavity 17, esophageal 18, stomach 19, gut 20, vagina 21 and etc. Battle with pathogenic microorganisms maintains homeostasis and regulates overall health. Moreover, a new epoch has been in advent due to the development of incumbent technologies based on in vivo imaging 22, CRISPR/Cas 9 23, phage display 24 and immunotherapy 25, leading to more convenient and effective prognostics, diagnosis and therapies for various diseases, especially cancer.

Over the past several decades, a new approach, theranostics, referring to diagnostics and therapy, sparked the prosperity of cancer treatment with high accuracy and specificity owing to the development of nanomedicine 26. Conventional theranostic platforms using inorganic nanoparticles such as iron oxide nanoparticles (IONP), gold-based nanoparticles and quantum dots (QD) present great potential advantages and seem to reach the clinical translation status 26. However, they leave some drawbacks such as low biocompatibility, high toxicity, non-biodegradability and lack of targeting 26. Hence, biological obstacles, including enzymatic substrates, naturally-derived transporters, microorganisms, and cells, were applied to overcome the former blemishes and further improved the next generation of cancer theranostics 26. Among these biological obstacles, microorganisms are known for their easy applications in the area of cancer theranostics by serving as probes 27, monitors 28, drugs 29 or immunotherapeutic composites 30. More importantly, the microorganisms per se provide unique structures and characteristics that make themselves beneficial for cancer theranostics. For example, the head of T4 phage contains immunomodulators 31 that can be exploited for cancer therapy 32. Oncolytic vesicular stomatitis virus (VSV) stimulates the innate immune system and proinflammatory responses, thus inhibiting melanoma 33. Also, as an immunomodulator, Listeria monocytogenes may induce bacteria for stimulating CD8+ cytotoxic T-cells that are cancer killers 34. Ganoderma sinense inhibits H1299 non-small-cell lung cancer ex vivo and in vivo

35 mainly because it contains polysaccharides that can regulate immune cells and induce cytokines 25. Application of Trypanosoma cruzi epimastigotes aggrandizes the NADPH oxidase activity to inhibit tumorigenesis because it systematically activates macrophages, dendritic cells, CD4+ and CD8+ T cells 36. Therefore, microorganisms are promising next-generation theranostic platforms.

However, there are still challenges for using microorganisms in the field of cancer theranostics because of the complicated interactions between cancer cells and microorganisms. First, the distinctive structures and properties of different microorganisms exert distinguished contributions to different cancers. Second, even the same microorganisms affect cancer cell proliferation, progression, and death discrepantly at different stages or time points of the tumor development for the same type of cancer. Third, cancer cells excrete growth factors and molecules, thereby influencing the survival and functions of the microorganisms. Moreover, in normal TME, oncogenic microbiota induce oncogenesis, beneficial microbiota suppresses oncogenesis, and engineered microbiota injected into normal TME could serve as tumor monitors or diagnostic factors. In contrast, engineered microbiota injected into TME could not only provide monitor functions but also act as therapeutic factors, developing TME into an oncolytic milieu (Figure 1). This review explores the basic knowledge of the characteristics of microorganisms, their interaction with cancer, and their potential applications for cancer theranostics.

In general, bacterial viruses, which are referred to as bacteriophages or phages, are verified to bear capacities in infecting bacteria. They cannot replicate without host cells in nature 37. Phages are generally viruses containing single or double-stranded nucleic acids (DNA or RNA) that are protected by proteins with or without tails. They are principally classified into two categories, including lytic phages and lysogenic phages, depending on the replication status when they are formed in the host cells 38. Basically, phages range from 24 to 400 nm in size 39, and consist of the capsid (head), which protects the genetic materials with or without tails and other exceptions 40, 41. Lytic phages are named by their lytic cycle, whereas lysogenic phages only follow the lysogenic cycle 42. Genetic materials of the phages are integrated into and replicated along with the host cells at the lysogenic cycle 43, followed by the lytic cycle if activated 43. Lytic phages used the host biosynthetic machines to produce the genetic materials, coated with proteins and lysis proteins before mature phages appear. Then the mature phages get the host cells ruptured since enough lysis proteins accumulated 42, 44. Filamentous phages such as M13, fd, and f1 are lysogenic and replicate without killing the host cells. They are thus usually used in phage display technology to express peptides or antibodies, especially on pIII and pVIII proteins 45. Unlike filamentous phages, T7 phage presents proteins or peptides on the capsid protein gp10B 46. In addition, the highly immunogenic outer capsid protein (gene product hoc) in phages can modulate the immune response; especially, the gene product hoc in T4 phage head contains immunoglobulin superfamilies 31. Therefore, they are candidates for cancer therapy 32

Viruses other than bacterial viruses, especially oncolytic viruses, are the ones that could exist in tumors for cancer theranostics. Oncolytic viruses are tumor-selective replicating tools, which can effectively kill tumor cells with acceptable side effects on normal cells 47. Several viruses have exhibited their oncolytic characteristics, such as adenovirus, vesicular stomatitis virus (VSV), vaccinia virus, reovirus, and herpes simplex virus (HSV) because of their unique structures 47. For example, an adenovirus contains episomal dsDNA ranging from 30kb to 38kb and is coated with a capsid mostly carrying RDG motifs. It could infect a large number of cells with integrins or coxsackievirus and adenovirus receptor (CAR) no matter whether they are dividing or not 47. Likewise, the G protein on the VSV surfaces infects many tumorous cells 48, the H protein on the spike of measles virus recognizes CD46 or signaling lymphocyte activation molecule (SLAM) on mammal cells 49, and the envelope glycoproteins (gB&gC) on HSV interact with the surface heparin sulfated proteoglycans (HSPGs) on mammal cells to further help glycoproteins (gD) stimulate nectin-1 or herpes viral entry mediators (HVEM) on mammal cells 50. Thus, they provide enough biological access for genetic editing and gene modification. Especially, they can be armed with luciferase genes, fluorescent proteins or radio-labelled substrate molecules for tumor imaging 51 as well as siRNA, shRNA or therapeutics for tumor inhibiting 52. For example, engineered Newcastle disease virus with apoptin could activate tumor death 53

Bacteria are single-cell microorganisms basically consisting of cell walls, cell membranes, cytoplasm, nuclear bodies, and other spatial structures, including capsule, flagellum, fimbria, and endospore. Bacteria were used as an anti-cancer agent by German physicians one hundred and fifty years ago. Since then, they have been found useful in cancer therapy. Tumors regressed when they were infected by certain kinds of bacteria, such as Streptococcus pyogenes for neck cancer, Bacillus Calmette-Guérin (BCG) for bladder cancer, and Clostridium histolyticum for metastatic cancer 54, 55. Some bacteria are naturally existing to form colonization and inherent to tumors, and thus they can excrete anti-cancerous enzymes or agents by mesosomes and ribosomes. More specifically, anaerobic bacteria can easily survive in the TME with underprivileged oxygens, but anaerobic bacteria could destroy the tumor. Gram-negative anaerobes, such as Salmonella could get into the tumors and grow both inside and outside, while Gram-positive anaerobes, such as Clostridia and Bifidobacteria, proliferate in the TME without or with oxygen even in the presence of tumor necrosis 54. Owing to the simple genomes of bacteria, they could be genetically engineered as vectors to carry and deliver various anti-cancerous agents, including but not limited to siRNA, shRNA, microRNA, therapeutic DNA, immunomodulators, antiangiogenic and cytotoxic molecules 56. Bacteria that could uptake nanoparticles or imaging agents (i.e. 18F-FDS) as food granules could be employed in tumor monitoring and imaging 57. The flagella and LPS in the cell wall are mediators for different immune cells, including CD8+ T cells, Treg cells, macrophage, NK cell and dendritic cells in TME 58

Fungi are eukaryotic organisms, which can attack, infect or influence the human body under diverse circumstances. Cell walls are critical components of fungi (including mushroom and yeast), which help assist fungi in resisting environmental stress and invading ecological niches 59. Polysaccharides make up more than 90% of fungi cell walls with extension decorations determined by the pathogens 60, which are currently called “pathogen-associated molecular patterns” (PAMPs), including β-glucan, mannans, and chitin 61

(Figure 2D). Human bodies recognize PAMPs by innate immune cells through cascade signaling pathways of pro-inflammatory and anti-inflammatory cytokines, such as retinoic acid-inducible gene 1 (RIG-I)-like receptors (RLRs), nucleotide oligomerization domain (NOD)-like receptors (NLRs), Toll-like receptors (TLRs) and C-type lectin receptors (CLRs) 62. Pro-inflammatory cytokines are often key factors inducing oncogenesis 63, whereas anti-inflammatory cytokines may support cancer therapy 64.

Protozoa are eukaryotic organisms dwelling in extracellular fluids or inside host cells due to their innate evasion and resistance to the human immune system 65. There are several strategies for protozoa to get away from humoral immune defenses so that they could further affect human bodies. Firstly, an isomeric host complement-mediated compound named 160-kD glycoprotein (gp160) is expressed to conjugate C3b and C4b and then suppress the complement-mediated lysis of protozoa 66, 67. Some protozoa such as Leishmania have modified surface lipophosphoglycan (LPG), which acts as a barrier to protect parasites from being attacked by lytic C5b-C9 membrane attack complex (MAC) 68. Similarly, other protozoa like Trypanosoma brucei resist primate-specific trypanosome lysis factors (TLFs) based cytotoxicity due to their well-known structure called flagellar pocket 69. Trypanosoma cruzi may present similar effects on the mammalian cells due to its same flagellum structure 70. Plasmodium falciparum expressed VAR2CSA that could target tumors for cancer theranostics 71. Secondly, protozoa remodel the compartments of host cells and inhibit host cell signaling pathways that contribute to antimicrobial mechanisms 65. Toxoplasma gondii restricts the fusion of lysosomes and endosomes by dwelling in phagosomes, whereas T. cruzi destroys the Ca2+-regulated lysosomal exocytic pathway in mammalian cells 72. Thirdly, some protozoa (i.e., Plasmodium falciparum) impair the capacity of dendritic cells (DCs) to activate antigen-specific primary and secondary T cell responses by binding to myeloid DCs 73. Plasmodium falciparum exerts some organelles (i.e., rhoptry, microneme and dense granule) just like Toxoplasma gondii, therefore, both may display some similar properties in the TME. Sporozoites of Theileria annulate and Theileria parva transformed into schizonts in mammalian leucocytes, meanwhile stimulating apoptotic and proinflammatory effects 74

Normally, microorganisms influence the homeostasis of the host. Some microbial communities reside in the oral, skin, gut, nasal cavity, lung, pancreas, prostate, urinary or genital tract and coexist with the human body peacefully. In contrast, others stimulate chronic immune reactions or even enter tumors. For one thing, pathogenic microorganisms contribute to disease development by excreting metabolites, stimulating an immune response, and activating inflammatory pathways. For another, commensal microorganisms residing at the barrier sites exert protecting effects through resisting pathogens and regulating the immune response and metabolism of the host, such as inducing migration of immune cells, stimulating chemokines and cytokines etc 13. In the TME, the relationship between microorganisms and tumors depends on the place of tumor occurrence as well as the category of microorganisms. For decades, some TMEs, in particular in the lung, have long been demonstrated as a sterile environment by oncologists. However, this hypothesis has been challenged by the current technologies and recent studies 75. There is increasing evidence that microorganisms are naturally present in tumors or around tumors, constitute TME, and participate in tumor development. In addition, some microorganisms restrict the development of tumors on the one hand, and some others contribute to tumor growth on the other hand.

Many microbiotas reside in the upper and lower respiratory tract from the nasal cavity, pharynx, larynx to the trachea, bronchi, and lung. Among them, several microorganisms are living with respiratory tumors. Significant different diversities of bacterial microbiomes have been detected using bacterial 16S rRNA sequencing between the normal nasal cavity and malignant nasal neoplasia 76. Gong et al. compared the profiles of microbiotas among normal larynx, laryngeal cancer, and the normal tissues adjacent to laryngeal cancer and found the different populations of microorganisms among them 77. Evidence has also shown the discrepancies of microorganisms in other lung cancer tissues by biopsy or bronchoscopy 78.

The digestive tract begins from the oral cavity to the anus throughout from the outside of the body to the inside of the body as well as the appendicle organs, including the liver, gallbladder, and pancreas. Thus a majority of microorganisms live in the digestive tract. Since it is a long tract of tubes with complexities of structures and circumstances, there are multiple factors to generate divers of tumors by microbiome residents, including pathogenic, opportunistic, and commensal microorganisms. Different from the infective and opportunistic microbiota in the digestive tract leading to cancer, the commensal microbiomes could promote the body's health and prevent cancer 79. To date, the data of commensal microbiomes in the digestive tract has been well established, especially in the gut.

Similar to the gastrointestinal tract, the genitourinary organs are also easy to form tumors and have abundant commensal microorganisms because the sterile environment of the genitourinary tract has been abandoned 80. In an interesting way, the Actinomycetes and BCG around and in bladder cancer prevent tumor relapses and show potential treatment effects for bladder cancer 81. For females, HPV-induced cervical carcinogenesis has been demonstrated to be linked with microbiota dysbiosis in the vagina/cervix and cervical cancer 82. Not coming singly but in pairs, for males, Bacteroides and Streptococcus species have been detected in prostate cancer. However, their roles need further exploration 83.

Once upon a time, the infection of microbiomes, including phages, viruses, bacteria, fungi, protozoa etc. has been concerned because it is thought to result in tumorigenesis and carcinogenesis not only in situ but also in distant tissues or organs. Pathogenic microorganisms play multiple oncogenic roles that contribute to cancer formation and development. A wide range of microorganisms can get through the human body from skin, mouth, and other trenches like wounds. There are a large number of studies reporting the relationship of pathogenic viruses and tumors, such as Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) for nasopharyngeal carcinoma 84, hepatitis virus for liver cancer 85, human papillomavirus (HPV) for oropharyngeal 86 and cervical cancer 87, and human T-lymphotropic virus for leukemia 88. Likewise, bacteria are also the sinful archcriminal in oncogenesis. For example, Helicobacter pylori (H. pylori) contributes to gastric cancer 89, Bacteroidetes, Verrucomicrobia, and Proteobacteria to gut cancer 90, and Veillonella, Megasphaera to lung cancer 91. What is more, fungi and protozoa are also criminals that promote the initiation and development of cancer. For example, Aspergillus flavus lead to liver cancer 92, and Liver fluke Clonorchis sinensis causes cholangiocarcinoma 93. Besides, microorganisms naturally present in TME sometimes play an anti-tumor role. This phenomenon was mostly found in phages and bacteria. In this section, we discussed the oncogenic roles (phages, viruses, bacteria, fungi, and protozoa) and the anti-tumorous roles (phages and bacteria) of microorganisms naturally in TME (Table 1-3).

As microorganisms naturally present in the environment, phages are also present in the human body and TME 94. Firstly, phages are suspected to bind integrin proteins (e.g. αIIbβ3, αvβ3), which are expressed on tumorous cells and activated T cells 95. Secondly, phages can mediate invading pathogens that are tumor inducers 96, and thus may suppress tumor growth. In particular, endogenous phages modulate bacteria in the oral-gut axis, therefore maintaining the microbiota homeostasis in TME 96. Third, phages can stimulate different immune cells, which are important cells in TME. For example, T4 phages activate dendritic cells 97, inhibit CD3 receptor-induced T-cell proliferation, and stimulate the migration of granulocytes and mononuclear cells 98. In addition, phages control the homeostasis of host immune reactions in tumor-bearing animals and humans, therefore influencing TME 99. Some metagenomic analysis presents certain type of phages related to TME 96, 100, and those residing in TME 96 are listed in Table 1.

Viruses naturally present in TME are oncogenic factors. Some viruses express oncogenes which induce tumorigenesis by influencing cell cycles and DNA damage processes 101. For instance, E6 and E7 expressed by HPV induce anal cancer, cervical cancer, and vaginal cancer; LANA and v-cyclin expressed by Kaposi's sarcoma herpes virus (KSHV) induce Kaposi's sarcoma and primary effusion lymphoma; NS3, NS4B, NS5A and core proteins expressed by hepatitis C virus (HCV) induce hepatocellular carcinoma; HBsAg and HBx expressed by hepatitis B virus (HBV) induce hepatocellular carcinoma; EBNA-1, EBNA-2 LMP-1, and LMP-2 expressed by Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) induce Burkitt's lymphoma, nasopharyngeal cancer, Hodgkin and non-Hodgkin's lymphoma, etc 102. We summarized these viruses in Table 2. In particular, the therapeutic approaches for those oncogenic are also included in this table. Moreover, the above oncogenes can also target tumors by binding molecules on the tumorous cells 102. Besides, viruses stimulate oncogenic inflammation by mediating STAT3, MAPK, and NFκB and signaling pathways 103. Also, viruses induce cancers by causing tissue injury. For example, HBV and HCV trigger liver cirrhosis and hepatocarcinogenesis 104. Additionally, some viruses promote tumor growth and progression by modulating cytokine/chemokine networks 105 and manipulating cell cycles and DNA damage processes 101.

Similar to viruses, bacteria are also modulators of inflammation and induce oncogenesis 106. For example, FadA molecules expressed by Fusobacterium nucleatum regulate the inflammation and oncogenesis in colorectal cancer due to its binding to E-cadherin and activation of β-catenin signalling 107. In addition, F. nucleatum also plays tumorigenic roles in inhibiting T cell proliferation and inducing T cell apoptosis in colorectal cancer 108. Bacteria also produce carcinogens such as bile acids, H2S and deoxycholic acid 109. In contrast to the oncogenic effects of bacteria, they also exert important anti-cancer effects by modulating the cytokine/chemokine networks and immune cells in TME 34, especially for some commensal bacteria in colon cancer 110

The roles of fungi naturally existing in TME are also oncogenic. They produce carcinogens such as nitrosamines and acetaldehyde 109. Glycans as major components of fungal walls trigger complement cascade in TME 111. Another mechanism for fungi to promote cancer is molecular mimicry 109. For instance, Candida albicans expresses complement receptor 3-related protein (CR3-RP), which has a similar structure to CR3 on the leukocytes, interfering with the immune response in TME 109

Traditionally, protozoa are parasites not only known as pathogenic factors but also play tumorigenic roles. The oncogenic roles of protozoa are mainly manifested in stimulating inflammation, modulating cytokine/chemokine networks, and triggering the response of immune cells 112. For instance, the interleukin-12 triggered by Toxoplasma gondii stimulates T cells and natural killer (NK) cells in promoting cancer 112

In terms of theranostics, the potential applications of microorganisms for cancer have been well established with the development of nanotechnology. Over the past decades, phage display and other microbiome-based carriers have played a major role in cancer theranostics not only by catering molecules or drugs directly to tumors but also by allowing the visualization or detection of cancer. In this part, we review different microbiota used for cancer diagnosis and therapy (Table 4-8).

The boost of phage display opens a new era for cancer theranostics, especially since this technology was awarded Nobel Prize in 2018 113. Phage display can be used to visualize cancer location and further reflect the behaviors and activities of cancer 114. Phage display technology has contributed to cancer theranostics in the following aspects (Table 4). First, phage antibody library screening is used for selecting accurate targets for detecting cancer at the early stage. Second, phage display-derived peptides are utilized as imaging probes for monitoring cancer. Third, phages containing nanoparticles or small molecules as drugs could help prognosticate cancer. For instance, a phage-displayed random peptide library can be used to identify the epitope sequences, such as pinpointing CSPG4 as a target for theranostics of B-cell lymphoma 115. Likewise, integration of an M13mp19 phage-displayed peptide library and a microfluidic system discovered cancer cell-specific oligopeptides for ovarian cancer diagnosis (Figure 3)

116. AF680-labeled phage nanoparticles with targeting peptides are utilized for ovarian cancer cell line imaging by fluorescent microscopy 22. M13KO7 phage display was employed to isolate an anti-HER3 antigen-binding fragment as a near-infrared fluorescence imaging probe for imaging HER3-positive cancer through positron emission tomography (PET) (Figure 4)

117. In addition, M13 phage based probe is a powerful method for the detection of circulating tumor cells 118. Besides, peptides screened by M13mp19 phage display can also be applied for targeted cancer therapy by targeting the TME, receptors on cancerous cells, or tumor vasculature (Figure 5)

Except for M13 phage, T4 and T7 phage display has also been employed for identifying tumorous antigens, screening targeting peptides, and generating vaccines for cancer theranostics 32, 46. For example, we generated a naked eye counting system to detect the cancer-biomarker miRNAs by fluorescent T7 phage 120. Besides, fd phage is applied for cancer diagnosis and therapy. For instance, we increased the detection sensitivity of anti-p53 antibody, a cancer biomarker, by a combination of antigens and fd phage nanofibers 121. Our group has also developed antiangiogenic targeted breast cancer therapy based on angiogenin-binding peptides displayed on the side wall of fd phage as well as the tumor-homing peptides displayed at the tip of the same phage 122. Moreover, coat proteins derived from fd-tet phages could guide the delivery of small interfering RNA (siRNA), leading to efficient breast cancer gene therapy 123. Many clinical trials of monoclonal antibodies based on phage display have been launched for cancer chemotherapy 124, such as Mapatumumab for lymphoma 125, colorectal cancer 126, and Drozitumab for chondrosarcoma, ovarian and colorectal cancers 127.

Unlike phages, oncolytic viruses are utilized for cancer theranostics in a different way (Table 5). Oncolytic viruses are used as anti-cancer vaccines generally in two directions. First, large viruses can cause diseases and rarely replicate in normal tissues. But they are abundant in tumors such as poliovirus 128, herpes simplex virus (HSV) 50, adenovirus 52, and vaccinia virus 129. These viruses bear virulence genes that replicate with tumor proliferation and play roles in anti-proliferation, anti-apoptosis, and immune modulators (Figure 6)

51. Second, small viruses have fast replication cycles and normally do not result in diseases, including vesicular stomatitis virus (VSV)130 and reovirus 131. These viruses are commonly used as vectors for gene therapy. Compared to large viruses, they are safer carriers for both in vitro and in vivo cell transfection 132. Besides, many monitoring systems, including bioluminescence imaging, fluorescence imaging, and nuclear medicine-based imaging, are widely applied both experimentally and clinically, which is based on the backbones of oncolytic viruses (Adenovirus 133-135, HSV-1 136, measles virus 137, Newcastle disease virus 53, parvovirus 138, vaccinia virus 139 and VSV 140-142) or the genes armed on them 51. For instance, engineered oncolytic measles virus (MV-GFP-HSNS-scEGFRvIII and MV-GFP-HAA-scEGFRvIII) can not only induce GFP expression for imaging the EGFRvIII-expressing glioma lines and xenografts but also present an antitumor activity 49. Oncolytic adenoviruses not only can be armed with luciferase cDNA 133, green fluorescent protein (GFP) 134, and sodium/iodide symporter (NIS) (Figure 7)

143. Nonpathogenic poliovirus triggers antitumor immune responses in TME, treating recurrent glioblastoma in clinical trials 144. Vaccinia viruses not only trigger anti-tumoral immunity by immune cells but also act as vectors for gene therapy for cancers 145, 146.

Traditionally, bacteria are thought to be deleterious organisms to the human body owing to their pathogenicity that causes different diseases such as infection and cancer 147. Even though bacterial therapy for cancer was claimed as an effective approach a long time ago, it has not been actively studied until the recent findings show their multiple theranostic effects. Briefly, in cancer theranostics, bacteria have been employed as a probe to detect cancer, as a sensor to monitor cancer, and as a therapeutic drug to treat cancer (Table 6). Bacteria-derived elements can also be used as therapeutic drugs for cancer treatment. In addition, bacteria localized to TME modulate chemokines, cytokines, and tumor-infiltrating immune cells, representing a new mechanism by which bacteria target and suppress cancer 148. Escherichia coli strain MG1655 injected into tumor-bearing mice can uptake 18F-FDS to become visualized by PET imaging of tumors (Figure 9)

57. Cytosine deaminase and 5-fluorocytosine derived from Escherichia coli inhibit mutant lung cancer A549 cells by activating apoptosis 149. On the one hand, Salmonella Typhimurium VNP20009 itself injected into murine melanoma inhibits tumor growth and lung metastasis 150. On the other hand, VNP20009 can also be used as a vector to deliver a specific gene to treat colon cancer in a mice model 151. Likewise, Listeria monocytogenes and its products stimulate an immune response (inducing immune cells and modulating cytokines) and act as gene vectors for delivering therapeutics (tumor antigen, DNA plasmid, siRNA, shRNA, etc.) for cancer therapy (Figure 10)

153. Mannose-sensitive hemagglutinin armed on Pseudomonas aeruginosa inhibits tumor growth and reverses epithelial-mesenchymal transition of skin cancer 154. In addition, many Listeria monocytogenes and Salmonella Typhimurium strains are employed in cancer therapy 148.

Similar to bacteria, fungi have also been found effective in cancer therapy (Table 7). Some compounds derived from medicinal fungi induce mitochondria-mediated apoptosis and thus kill cancer cells 155. These studies investigated the anti-tumor effects of compounds derived from fungi in vitro. For instance, polysaccharide-K derived from a mushroom, Coriolus versicolor, stimulates apoptosis of leukemia HL-60 cells 156. Ganoderic acids (B, Mf, Mk, S and T) and ribonuclease derived from another mushroom, Ganoderma lucidum, also trigger apoptosis in many human cancer cell lines, including colon cancer HCT116 cells 157. Similarly, cordycepin derived from Cordyceps militaris (a mushroom) has been used as an anti-tumoral agent in leukemia U937 and NB-4 cells 158 because it can trigger apoptosis and autophagy. Compounds from Laetiporus sulphureus present cytotoxic effects on five cancer cell lines, including leukemia HL-60 cells, colorectal carcinoma SW-480 cells, breast cancer MCF-7 cells, lung cancer A-549 cells, and liver cancer SMMC-721 cells 159. Polypeptides from Pleurotus eryngii suppress cervical, breast, and stomach cancer cells and modulate macrophages in vitro

160. Extracts from Inonotus obliquus also inhibit prostatic adenocarcinoma PC-3 cells and breast carcinoma MDA-MB-231 cells 161. Agglutinin from Paecilomyces japonica also exerts cytotoxic effects on human breast cancer MDA-MB-231 cells, human pancreas cancer AsPc-1 cells, and stomach cancer SNU-1 cells 162. Pigments derived from Daldinia concentrica 163 and Xylaria schweinitzii 164 also present cytotoxicity against lung carcinoma SK-LU-I cells, hepatocellular carcinoma HepG2 cells, epidermal carcinoma KB cells, and breast carcinoma MCF7 cells. Lectins derived from Hericium erinaceum

168 can suppress the proliferation of HepG2 hepatoma cells and MCF7 breast cancer cells. Extracts from Lepista inversa also suppress cancer cell lines, including NCI-H460 (lung cancer), HCT-15 (colon cancer), AGS (gastric cancer) and MCF-7 (breast cancer) 169. Cytotoxic effects of 5-methylmellein from Xylaria psidii

171 on colon cancer HCT116 cells, prostatic adenocarcinoma PC-3 cells, and MCF7 breast cancer cells are also found to result from the activation of apoptosis. Breast cancer cell lines are also inhibited by orf239342 from Agaricus bisporus, Brefeldin A from Agaricus blazei, ergosterol from Amauroderma rude, organic molecules from Amauroderma rugosum

175, ethanol extracts from Fomes fomentarius , methanol extracts from Fuscoporia torulosa, marmorin from Hypsizigus marmoreus, Panepoxydone from Lentinus crinitus, β-glucan from Lentinus edodes, extracts from Lignosus rhinocerotis, ribonuclease from Lyophyllum shimeji, chromatographic fractions from Marasmius oreades, hispolon from Phellinus linteus, antioxidant protein from Pholiota nameko, extracts from Pleurotus ostreatus, compounds from Podostroma cornu-damae, β-glucan from Poria cocos, polysaccharides from Schizophyllum commune

176. Yet the immunomodulation effects of fungi develop a novel insight for oncologists to generate better therapeutic avenues for cancer treatments 177. For example, a polysaccharide derived from a mushroom, Boletus edulis, increases the cytotoxic activity of the splenic natural killer cells and cytotoxic T lymphocytes, thus activating immune responses that inhibit the proliferation and growth of renal cancer in mice 177. Likewise, oral administration of β-1,3-Glucan derived from yeast (Saccharomyces cerevisae) in tumor-bearing mice stimulates granulocyte-macrophage progenitors and active cytokines such as IFN-γ, IL-1α, and IL-6, suppressing tumor progression 178.

In addition, fungal β-glucans accompanied with radiotherapy/chemotherapy have achieved positive therapeutic effects without obvious side effects on clinical trials of treating breast cancer, cervical cancer, gastrointestinal cancer, and prostate cancer 179. Polysaccharides from Ganoderma sinense modulate the activities of immune cells and secretion of cytokines 25, therefore suppressing H1299 non-small-cell lung cancer ex vivo and in vivo

35. Similarly, D-Fraction from Grifola frondosa suppresses breast cancer both in vivo and ex vivo, as well as restricts lung metastases of breast cancer by modulating immune effects 180. Mangrove-derived endophytic fungi inhibit in vitro angiogenesis of lung cancer induced by HPV-16 E7 oncoprotein 181. Extracts from Fomitopsis officinalis not only exert apoptotic effects on cancer cells but also decrease tumor size and elongate the lifespan of tumor-bearing mice 182. Nevertheless, more discoveries are needed to explore the potential of fungi in cancer diagnosis and therapy.

Due to the finding of the negative regulation impacts of protozoa on cancer progression 183, the anticancer action of protozoa and their products have been explored. Protozoa gradually gain their popular reputation not only in cancer treatment but also in cancer diagnosis and prognosis (Table 8). For example, VAR2CSA expressed by Plasmodium falciparum is a binding protein to oncofetal chondroitin sulfate, which is widely expressed in many types of tumors. Thus, Plasmodium falciparum expressing VAR2CSA and recombinant VAR2CSA (rVAR2) can be used as a targeting probe, together with therapeutic molecules for cancers theranostics (Figure 12)

71. Leukocytes infected by Theileria annulate and Theileria parva potentially express cancer hallmarks including hypoxia inducible factor-1 alpha (HIF1α), transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-β), telomerase reverse transcriptase (TERT), murine double minute 2 (MDM2), nuclear factor-k-gene binding (NF-kB), T. annulata prolyl isomerase I gene (TaPIN1), matrix metalloproteinase-9 (MMP-9), tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-α) and inhibitor of apoptosis protein (IAP), which are potential chemotherapeutic targets for cancer therapy 74. Likewise, Toxoplasma gondii and Toxoplasma gondii-derived molecules stimulate or block multiple signaling pathways such as TNF-α, NF-kB activity in modulating tumor microenvironment 112. Epimastigotes of Trypanosoma cruzi as vaccination could systematically activate macrophages, dendritic cells, CD4+ and CD8+ T cells, thereby increasing the NADPH oxidase activity to inhibit carcinogenesis (Figure 13)

The roles of microorganisms in cancer theranostics can be divided into two major types: to regulate tumor cells and mediate immune cells. As shown in Figure 14 and Table 4-8, the microorganisms above, including phages, oncolytic viruses, bacteria, fungi, and protozoa, present direct roles on tumor cells. Phages not only display tumor-targeting molecules (i.e., peptides, fragments) 116, 117, but also serve as drug delivery systems for cargos such as siRNA and antibodies 123, 124. Oncolytic viruses and bacteria play multi-functional roles in cancerous cells, including labeling them with imaging molecules (i.e., GFP, 18F-FDS and NIS) 51, 57, expressing cytotoxic components 50, 148, and delivering therapeutic agents 52, 153. Fungi only present cytotoxicity because their structure contains multiple polysaccharides 176, but protozoa only interact directly with tumor cells by expressing tumor-targeting proteins 71. In summary, the tumor-targeting effects of microorganisms are based on certain receptors on tumor cells 58, 71, 119, and the cytotoxic effects can be attributed to the stimulation of apoptotic (caspase 3/7, Bcl2, MAPK etc.) and autophagic pathways in tumor cells 53, 155, 184.

The theranostic effects of microorganisms on cancer often rely on the cytokine networks or signaling pathways produced by immune cells in the host. Macrophages, dendritic cells, T cells, and NK cells are the most common types of immune cells triggered by microorganisms. Bacteria can stimulate the anti-tumoral effects through the use of macrophages to activate IL-1β/TNF-α signaling 148, and the use of fungi/fungi extract to activate IL-1α/IL-6/IFN-γ signaling 178. Dendritic cells can also excrete IL-1β to further enhance CD8+ T cells and NK cells to produce IFN-γ when phages 97, bacteria 148, or protozoa 36, 185 are used to treat diseases. The downstream signaling pathways of NFκB, STAT, and TLR triggered by CD8+ T cells, Treg cells, and NK cells also participate in the microorganism-based cancer therapy 34, 145, 186.

In addition, many clinical trials have been launched, ongoing, or completed in the field of microorganisms applied for cancer theranostics. We searched these trials registered in ClinicalTrials.gov (https://clinicaltrials.gov/) and EudraCT (https://www.clinicaltrialsregister.eu) and only listed all the completed studies that used microorganisms or engineered microorganisms directly in Table 9. The studies that used extracts and derived products of microorganisms are excluded from this table. As one can see, oncolytic viruses are mostly used for cancer therapy, especially in solid tumors, including ovarian cancer, bladder cancer, brain cancer, lung cancer, and gastrointestinal cancers. Moreover, to some extent, the anti-tumor effects of oncolytic viruses are somehow limited, and thus, they are employed with chemotherapeutic drugs together. Bacteria are mostly applied in cancer diagnosis or detecting the relationship between bacteria and cancers. Fang group screened the gut microbiota of colorectal cancer patients and found that the Fusobacterium Nucleatum and Clostridium symbiosum could be used to diagnose colorectal cancer (Figure 15, Table 9, Clinical Trial No. NCT02845973) 187. Fecal microbiota is also positively correlated with breast cancer and thus could be employed for early diagnosis of breast cancer (Table 9, Clinical Trial No. NCT01461070). Topical bacteriophage T4 endonuclease V shows positive effects in preventing the recurrence of skin cancer in patients undergoing kidney transplants (Table 9, Clinical Trial No. NCT00089180). Intravenous injection of oncolytic virus HSV-1 (HSV1716) is applied to chemotherapy for the treatment of different solid tumors, including cholangiocarcinoma, pancreatic neuroendocrine tumor, Ewing sarcoma, osteosarcoma, etc (Figure 16, Table 9, Clinical Trial No. NCT00931931) 188. Engineered Listeria are used for immunotherapy to treat of prostate cancer (Table 9, Clinical Trial No. NCT02625857). Protobics and low-bacteria diet act as adjuvants for potentially treating cancers. There are no completed clinical trials in these databases showing the application of fungi and protozoa in cancer theranostics. However, some products related to them are generated in this area. For instance, Imprime PGG, isolated from the cell wall of Saccharomyces cerevisiae, together with pembrolizumab, is being tested for its therapeutic effects on triple-negative breast cancer and melanoma (Clinical Trial No. NCT02981303).

Traditional detection for microbiota is normally based on culturing specific microorganisms. According to the theory of microorganism detection, we should get a general knowledge of what the microorganisms need for survival; they can be cultured for us to observe their characteristic growth features. For instance, as for bacteria, we can only know their category on the premise of knowing their colony-forming units, such as filamentous colony, undulate colony, spore colony and etc. Therefore, we cannot identify the microorganisms if we do not have any records of their characteristics unless we do not have the technologies to culture them in vitro. To fill this gap, biologists invented a new measurement to identify the microorganisms on the basis of different metabolites of different microorganisms. This technology, called metabolome, can detect the profile of the metabolites in cells 189. Yet, it is still challenging for biologists to deeply get insights into microorganism verification. The most straitened circumstance is that microorganisms excrete similar (or even the same) metabolites so that we cannot distinguish them. Therefore, to further verify these microorganisms, a more specific and precise method is needed.

In recent years, the measurement of microbiota based on 16S sequencing has been adopted for microbiologists to explore the spectra of microorganisms and further classify them. However, 16S sequencing is contrived in light of the high conservative structure and function of the 16S rDNA in bacteria. The main drawbacks of 16S sequencing for detecting microbiota lie in the errors and low sensitivity in detecting heterogeneity of intra‐species 190. Also, it is not appropriate for other microorganisms such as viruses and fungi. To better solve these problems, whole-metagenome sequencing was launched to map the genomic regions precisely. Whole-metagenome sequencing gives new insights to deeply observe the genome in the microbiota as a result of the development of next-generation sequencing technologies. Global archives have been established and have stored millions of datasets for bacterial and viral whole-metagenome sequencing 191. There is no doubt that more categories will be identified and classified based on whole-metagenome sequencing in the future.

As massive microbiota spectra have been established, there comes the development of TME research and cancer therapy. On the one hand, we can obtain certain parts of tumor tissues and submit them to whole-metagenome sequencing to find out whether there is microbiota living in them or not. If so, we can substantially excogitate their roles in TME and cancer development, for example, to understand whether they help contribute to tumor proliferation, metastasis or inhibit them through secreting specific small molecules or cooperating with immune cells. On the other hand, we can compare the similarities and differences of different cancer TME and further establish datasets for TME microbiota. Doing so will help better understand the TME and build a foundation for cancer immunotherapy.

Even though many clinical trials have been down in the application of microorganisms for cancer theranostics, there are still some limitations and challenges. As we can see in Table 9, most completed trials directly using microorganisms in this field are using oncolytic viruses and bacteria. More explorations of phage, fungi, and protozoa in the clinical application should be investigated. Efforts should be made to evaluate not only the extracts and products of them but also the microorganisms themselves. Moreover, clinical tumor imaging and probe systems based on microorganisms are also limited and need further exploration. The most challenging part is the safety problems. Whether the microorganisms will only influence the tumor or not is important. If there will be side effects, how to decrease these effects after tumor treatment should be examined. Thus, more animal studies are welcome to discover the safety of microorganisms in individual bodies, in particular, to understand the immune response, the interaction between the introduced microorganisms and healthy tissues.

The applications of microorganisms for cancer theranostics have excited the oncologists in understanding the pathogenicity, diagnosis, progression, and treatment of cancer. Naturally, microorganisms reside in tumors, some of which are oncogenic, anti-tumoral, or just commensally residents. Many completed clinical trials have shown the diagnostic effects of microorganisms on the tumor. In addition, the anti-tumor functions of oncolytic viruses and bacteria have been widely launched clinically. However, more investigations should be done to evaluate the clinical values of phage, fungi, and protozoa. Due to the development of whole-metagenome sequencing, screening and identifying the specific microorganisms in certain tumor tissue has never been made easy like today. In this way, we can investigate the microbiota spectra of the tumor tissues and further distinguish their effects on cancer theranostics. Therefore, by uncovering the different impacts of the different microorganisms, we could deeply generate a precise probe, monitor, vaccine, or drug for cancer diagnosis and therapy.

AkhverdyanVZGakERTokmakovaILStoynovaNVYomantasYAMashkoSVApplication of the bacteriophage Mu-driven system for the integration/amplification of target genes in the chromosomes of engineered Gram-negative bacteria-mini reviewAppl Microbiol Biotechnol20119185771

TrarbachTMoehlerMHeinemannVKohneCHPrzyborekMSchulzCPhase II trial of mapatumumab, a fully human agonistic monoclonal antibody that targets and activates the tumour necrosis factor apoptosis-inducing ligand receptor-1 (TRAIL-R1), in patients with refractory colorectal cancerBr J Cancer201010250612

Microorganisms existing in normal tumor microenvironment (TME) and oncolytic TME present different functions. Oncogenic microorganism expressed molecules that stimulate oncogenesis. Engineered microorganisms are designed as monitors or diagnostic factors in normal TME, and serve as monitors or therapeutic factors in oncolytic TME. Some microorganisms are acting as anti-tumoral therapeutics themselves in TME.

The unique structures of microorganisms applied for cancer theranostics. (A) Phage can be modified for displaying tumor-targeting peptides, anti-tumor agents, as well as acting as oncolytic factors themselves. (B) Oncolytic viruses can be labelled with imaging agents or therapeutics for cancer theranostics. (C) Bacteria uptake nanoparticles or imaging agents as food granule for tumor imaging. Bacterial mesosomes and ribosome contribute to excrete anti-cancerous enzymes or agents. The flagella and LPS in the bacteria cell wall can modulate immune response for cancer therapy. (D) Polysaccharides in the cell walls of fungi (including mushroom and yeast) could stimulate immune cells for cancer therapy. (E) Protozoa expressing or modified with therapeutics (ie.VAR2CSA) and flagella in the protozoa are sometimes anti-tumorous. Transformation of sporozoites into schizonts stimulate apoptosis and proinflammation.

Administration of engineered adenoviruses suppresses tumor growth and prolongs survival of lung cancer bearing mice. (A) Bioluminescence images of subcutaneous tumor-bearing mice after administration of viruses. (B) Activity of viruses. (C) Amounts of viruses. (D) Tumor volume after administration of viruses. (E) Survival of subcutaneous tumor-bearing mice after administration of viruses. (F) Viral genome copies in the lungs after administration of viruses. (G) Immunofluorescent staining of lung tumors after administration of viruses. (H) Survival of orthotopic tumor-bearing mice after administration of viruses. (I) Bioluminescence images of orthotopic tumor-bearing mice after administration of viruses. (J) HE staining of lung tumor. Adapted with permission from 143, Copyright 2020, The American Association for the Advancement of Science.

Potential functions of microorganisms on tumor cells for cancer theranostics. Phages and protozoa can display tumor-targeting agents such as peptides. Oncolytic viruses and bacteria can be labelled with imaging agents such as GFP, NIS and so on. Phages oncolytic viruses and bacteria are possible vectors for delivering certain therapeutics including apoptin, siRNA and antibodies. Oncolytic viruses, bacteria, fungi and protozoa contain or express cytotoxic components that can assist cancer therapy.

Screen peptides for targeted therapy of cancer 119; Generating gene-targeting agents for cancer therapy 30; Generating monoclonal antibody for cancer chemotherapy 124; Generating vaccines;32, 46 Guiding the delivery of small interfering RNA (siRNA) for cancer gene therapy;123 Acting as immunomodulators 193

Agaricus bisporus 176; Agaricus blazei 176; Amauroderma rude 176; Amauroderma rugosum 172; Antrodia camphorate 173; Clitocybe alexandri 169; Coprinus comatus 174; Cordyceps militaris 158; Coriolus versicolor 156; Daldinia concentrica 163; Flammulina velutipes 175; Fomes fomentarius 176; Fomitopsis officinalis 182; Fuscoporia torulosa 176; Ganoderma lucidum 157; Ganoderma sinense 35; Grifola frondose 180; Hericium erinaceum 165; Hypsizigus marmoreus 176; Inonotus obliquus 161; Laetiporus sulphureus 159; Lentinus crinitus 176; Lentinus edodes 176; Lepista inversa 169; Lignosus rhinocerotis 176; Lyophyllum shimeji 176; Marasmius oreades 176; Paecilomyces japonica 162; Phellinus linteus 176; Pholiota nameko 176; Pleurotus eryngii 160; Pleurotus ostreatus 176; Podostroma cornu-damae 176; Poria cocos 176; Russula delica 166; Russula lepida 167; Schizophyllum commune 176; Tricholoma mongolicum 168; Xylaria psidii 170; Xylaria schweinitzii 164; Xylaria sp.171;

A Phase I/IIa Study Of The Safety, Tolerability And Biological Effect Of Single And Repeat Administration Of The Selectively Replication-Competent Herpes Simplex Virus Hsv1716 Into The Tumour-Bearing Pleural Cavity (Intrapleural) In Patients With Inoperable Malignant Pleural Mesothelioma.