This is an open access article under the terms of the http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ License, which permits use and distribution in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited, the use is non‐commercial and no modifications or adaptations are made.

The “epithelial barrier hypothesis” proposes that the exposure to various epithelial barrier–damaging agents linked to industrialization and urbanization underlies the increase in allergic diseases. The epithelial barrier constitutes the first line of physical, chemical, and immunological defense against environmental factors. Recent reports have shown that industrial products disrupt the epithelial barriers. Innate and adaptive immune responses play an important role in epithelial barrier damage. In addition, recent studies suggest that epithelial barrier dysfunction plays an essential role in the pathogenesis of the atopic march by allergen sensitization through the transcutaneous route. It is evident that external factors interact with the immune system, triggering a cascade of complex reactions that damage the epithelial barrier. Epigenetic and microbiome changes modulate the integrity of the epithelial barrier. Robust and simple measurements of the skin barrier dysfunction at the point‐of‐care are of significant value as a biomarker, as recently reported using electrical impedance spectroscopy to directly measure barrier defects. Understanding epithelial barrier dysfunction and its mechanism is key to developing novel strategies for the prevention and treatment of allergic diseases. The aim of this review is to summarize recent studies on the pathophysiological mechanisms triggered by environmental factors that contribute to the dysregulation of epithelial barrier function.

Leakiness of the gut epithelium is also implicated in systemic autoimmune and metabolic conditions such as obesity, diabetes, rheumatoid arthritis, multiple sclerosis, systemic lupus erythematosus, fatty liver, autoimmune hepatitis, and ankylosing spondylitis. Although further studies are needed, microbial dysbiosis and an impaired gut barrier are suspected in Alzheimer's disease, Parkinson's disease, chronic depression, and autism spectrum disorders.

The epithelium is a pivotal structure in host defense because it not only provides a physical barrier between the environment and the subepithelial region, but also contributes to the induction of an appropriate immune response against allergens, pathogens, and noxious stimuli that attenuate the epithelial barrier. Recent studies have shown that a defective epithelial barrier, with compromised tight junctions (TJs) and adherence junctions (AJs), is part of the underlying pathology in diseases such as AD, bronchial asthma, eosinophilic esophagitis, food allergy, CRS, and AR, which are discussed in this review.

Factors that have been recognized to damage the epithelial barrier include allergens, pathogens, commercial detergents, surfactants, emulsifiers in processed food, cigarette smoke, particulate matter, diesel exhaust, ozone, nanoparticles, and microplastics.

Supporting our “epithelial barrier hypothesis,” we discuss recent advances in our understanding of the mechanisms underlying epithelial barrier dysfunction triggered by environmental and other culprit factors. The latest technological developments to measure skin barrier dysfunction are reviewed.

The epithelial barrier consists of a stratified epithelial cellular sheet that forms a physical barrier on the body surface. Four main components can be identified: (a) epithelial cells; (b) structural proteins, such as filaggrin, loricrin, involucrin, and proteins involved in the formation of TJs and AJs; (c) secreted epithelial products, such as mucus, antimicrobial peptides, and a lipid‐rich matrix composed of ceramides, cholesterol, and free fatty acids (FFAs); and (d) epithelial microbiota (Figure 1).

Skin and mucosal barrier structure. The epithelial barrier of the skin and airways consists of four main components. (a): The epithelial layers—the epidermis consists of four sub‐layers and the airway epithelial barrier is made of a pseudostratified epithelium. (b): Structural proteins, such as filaggrin, natural moisturizing factor (NMF), ceramide, tight junctions (TJs), and adherence junctions (AJs). (c): Secreted molecules, such as mucin, anti‐microbial peptides, and fatty acids. (d) Microbiota on the surface of the epithelial barrier

The stratum corneum is the outermost layer, consisting of enucleated keratinocytes referred to as corneocytes. It is maintained by the complex interaction of the cornified envelope, intracytoplasmic moisturizing factors, and a complex lipid mixture in the extracellular space. Filaggrin is a structural protein important for the alignment of keratin filaments and the formation of the cornified envelope and natural moisturizing factor.

TJs are composed of transmembrane proteins, such as claudins, occludin, zonula occludens (ZOs), and junctional adhesion molecules, which regulate the paracellular permeability and are located in the stratum granulosum of the epidermis and mucosal epithelium. Allergens gain rapid entry across disrupted TJs, engage dendritic/Langerhans cells, and prime the systemic inflammatory response.

Endogenous and exogenous factors affecting epithelial barrier function. Allergens (eg, house dust mite) and noxious stimuli (eg, air pollution) attenuate the epithelial barrier function. An impaired skin barrier facilitates the entry of allergens and activation of the innate immune response. Damaged epithelial cells produce IL‐25, IL‐33, and TSLP, followed by activation of ILC2 and dendritic cells. Activated dendritic cells induce type 2 skewing and IgE production by B cells. Type 2 cytokines and degranulation of mast cells exacerbate the inflammation and further attenuates barrier function. Microbe‐associated molecular patterns (eg, CpG DNA) restore epithelial barrier integrity and maintain epithelial barrier function. DC: dendritic cell, ILC: innate lymphoid cell, EOS; eosinophil, MC: mast cell, TSLP: thymic stromal lymphopoietin, MAMP: microbe‐associated molecular pattern

Cigarette smoke and its reactive oxygen species (ROS) products impair the epithelial barrier function and increase epithelial permeability by triggering the RhoA/Rho‐associated protein kinase (ROCK) signaling pathway in which ROCK is activated after hyaluronan fragmentation via ROS, which leads to disruption of AJs through a decrease in E‐cadherin gene and protein expression in human bronchial epithelial cells (HBECs).

Volatile organic compounds (VOCs) are composed of carbon‐based molecules such as formaldehyde, benzene, and toluene that affect the urban air quality and human health. VOCs are commonly found in cleaning products, wallpaper, furniture, and plastics, and are main contributors to indoor air pollution.

Surfactants, a main constituent in detergents, can significantly damage the epithelial barrier because the detergent disrupts the lipid‐lipid and lipid‐protein interactions of the membrane. Our group showed that anionic surfactants can directly impair the TJ integrity of air‐liquid interface (ALI)–cultured normal human keratinocytes (NHEKs) and HBECs.

In addition, treatment with post‐laundry detergent residue was demonstrated to open the epithelial barrier in a dose‐dependent manner. RNA sequencing analysis indicates that exposure to 50 000 times diluted detergents upregulated gene expression associated with lipid metabolism, oxidative stress, and cell survival to compensate the damage caused by the detergents to the cell membrane lipids. Laundry detergents had no significant effect on chromatin accessibility and DNA methylation in HBECs.

Hand hygiene is one of the most important preventive measures for contact transmission of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS‐CoV‐2). The World Health Organization recommended hand hygiene practices of using alcohol‐based sanitizers and/or handwashing with water and soap. An increased risk of hand eczema has been reported in children and health care workers during the coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID‐19) pandemic.

There is increasing evidence linking asthma to the use of respiratory irritant cleaning agents, mainly bleach, ammonia, and cleaning/degreasing sprays. In addition, exposure to low molecular weight agents/irritants in cleaning products and disinfectants is related to adult‐onset asthma.

The protease activity of allergens, such as house dust mites (HDMs), Aspergillus fumigatus, and pollen, has been suggested to be involved in the pathogenesis of allergic diseases by increasing the epithelial permeability and causing barrier dysfunction (previously reviewed).

Unlike other protease allergens, Der f3 from Dermatophagoides farinae (Der f) induces pro‐inflammatory mediators (IL‐6, IL‐8, and granulocyte‐macrophage colony‐stimulating factor), but not IL‐25, IL‐33, and TSLP, and causes barrier dysfunction through PAR‐1 and PAR‐2.

Consistently, Cleemput et al showed that pollen proteases selectively and irreversibly damage the integrity and anchorage of columnar respiratory epithelial cells. In addition, this partial loss of barrier function facilitates the invasion of alpha‐herpesviruses.

The human body is colonized by a diverse microbial flora that plays an essential role in human health and disease. As the outermost component, the skin microbiota is the first line of defense against pathogenic microorganisms. It is known that healthy skin microbiota limits pathogen colonization via competition for space and nutrients, altering skin pH, and producing antimicrobial peptides (AMPs).

Moreover, when performing next‐generation sequencing on matched lesional and nonlesional skin tissue biopsy specimens from patients with AD and healthy subjects, we identified four TJs genes (CLDN4, CLDN5, TJP1, and TJP2) that are robustly correlated to microbiome dysbiosis in patients with AD.

Consistent with these results, Clausen et al reported that the microbiome alpha diversity is lower in patients with AD compared with healthy controls and is inversely correlated with disease severity, not only for lesional skin but also nonlesional skin. Filaggrin gene mutations were associated with microbiome composition in the nonlesional skin of patients with AD.

On the other hand, Roßberg et al reported that applying bacterial lysates of heat‐killed gram‐negative Escherichia coli and gram‐positive Enterococcus faecalis in early infancy does not influence the development of AD, AR, asthma, and sensitization at school age.

It is widely accepted that the epithelial barrier is armed with its own protective mechanisms. Epithelial cells sense pathogen‐associated molecular patterns by expressing pattern‐recognition receptors, including TLR and PAR. It is known that TLR2 is essential for maintaining epithelial barrier function.

S. aureus induces proinflammatory cytokines, such as tumor necrosis factor α (TNF‐α) in keratinocytes. We showed that TNF‐α and TNF‐like weak inducer of apoptosis (TWEAK) cooperate in the induction of apoptosis in primary keratinocytes and that a high TWEAK expression is observed in lesional AD skin.

A recent systematic review showed that anti–IL‐4 and IL‐13 receptor monoclonal antibodies (dupilumab), anti–IL‐5 monoclonal antibodies (mepolizumab and reslizumab), and anti–IL‐5 receptor alpha monoclonal antibodies (benralizumab) are effective treatments for severe asthma and AD.

Chymases are a family of serine proteases found primarily in mast cells. Zhou et al reported that chymase suppresses the expressions of occludin, claudin‐4, ZO‐1, E‐cadherin, focal adhesion kinase, and cytokeratin, resulting in dysfunction of the airway wall in the pathogenesis of asthma.

Histone acetylation induced by histone acetyltransferases is associated with gene transcription. On the other hand, histone deacetylases (HDACs) suppress gene transcription. Of interest, Nicodemus‐Johnson et al showed that exposure of HBEC to IL‐13 changes global DNA methylation patterns and results in long‐lasting epigenetic changes near asthma‐associated genes.

CpG sites are regions of DNA consisting of guanine and cytosine. The methylation of CpG sites plays an important role in the regulation of gene expression. We recently reported that an increased global methylation level in HBEC from asthmatic individuals. Interestingly, the inhibition of CpG methylation restores leakiness that was shown in the asthmatic epithelium.

The human filaggrin gene (FLG) is polymorphic with an intragenic copy number variation. Specifically, 10, 11, or 12 nearly identical tandem repeats can be present in exon 3. Not only loss‐of‐function mutation, but also low copy numbers of filaggrin affect AD risk.

Quantitative skin barrier assessment in vivo has potential value in many clinical applications, including diagnosis, follow‐up, prevention, and therapy evaluation. Several invasive and non‐invasive methods have been developed to study the barrier function. The measurement of skin hydration, colorimetry, skin surface pH, and sebometry are all examples of non‐invasive methods. However, these methods provide only limited information on different skin characteristics and conditions and do not directly measure the skin barrier function.

However, TEWL can be affected by several environmental factors. Indeed, its accuracy is dependent on humidity, temperature, and skin hydration level. In diseased skin, TEWL is higher due to damage in the skin barrier and/or alterations in keratinization.

Confocal Raman spectroscopy is another non‐invasive method to characterize the molecular composition of the skin in vivo by irradiating the sample with low‐power monochromatic laser light. After the incident light excites the molecules within the tissue, the light is reflected in a wavelength characteristic of each skin component. The scattered light is then captured and analyzed, thus allowing non‐invasive in vivo measurements at different depths within the tissue.

A recent study used confocal Raman spectroscopy to quantify the amount of water, ceramide, and urocanic acid in the skin, and found reduced levels of these components in atopic skin and a decreased lipid‐to‐protein ratio, suggesting the potential use of this technique for the stratification of AD patients.

A promising non‐invasive tool for detecting skin barrier function in vivo is represented by electrical impedance spectroscopy (EIS). The electrical impedance of a tissue measured at various frequencies provides information about its structure and integrity, reflecting its pathophysiological status because normal and pathologic tissues differ in cell size, shape, orientation, compactness, and membrane structures.

In the first group of studies in mice, EIS appeared to be a useful and reliable tool for detecting skin barrier defects. After experimentally damaging the skin barrier by tape stripping and epicutaneous application of proteases, such as papain, trypsin, and cholera toxin, a significant reduction in skin electrical impedance was observed. The findings were inversely correlated with TEWL.

Furthermore, EIS measurements on the non‐lesional skin of AD patients correlated with the number of tandem repeats in the FLG gene. EIS has many potential clinical applications (Figure 3). We consider that it may be useful for identifying infants with a high risk of developing AD in a simple, fast and non‐invasive manner. Preventive therapies can be recommended to strengthen the skin barrier function and simultaneously avoiding exposure to environmental factors. There is a current need to develop novel tools for monitoring skin in AD patients to predict exacerbations and lesion follow‐up in response to therapy.

Detection of epithelial barrier function by electric impedance spectroscopy. Quantitative skin barrier assessment in vivo can provide valuable information for the prevention, diagnosis, and monitoring treatment response of AD patients. Electrical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) can be useful for identifying infants with a high risk of developing AD by measuring the integrity of the epithelial barrier. EIS can be a valuable tool for precision medicine to prevent the atopic march, exacerbation, and relapse of AD

A dysfunctional epithelial barrier might facilitate the uptake of allergens and exogenous particles, leading to lesional inflammation. Allergen entry through a leaky epithelial barrier may cause systemic atopic responses that contribute to the atopic march. Understanding the underlying mechanisms involved in epithelial dysfunction is essential for developing novel strategies for the prevention and treatment of allergic diseases.

There is a pressing need to improve our understanding of the factors and molecular mechanisms associated with “leaky epithelial barriers.” Experimental models and skin organoids should be developed to study the passage of allergens across a leaky epithelial barrier. There is strong evidence linking barrier leakiness and inflammatory skin diseases, which needs to be considered when developing novel strategies for its prevention, early intervention, and diagnosis. Numerous strategies target the epithelial barrier including avoidance and dose control of hazardous products together with the development of safer alternatives, clinical application of EIS for the identification of individuals with a leaky barrier, development of therapeutic approaches for restoring the epithelial barrier integrity, and interventions through diet and microbiome.

Yasutaka Mitamura: Conceptualization, methodology, visualization, writing – original draft (equal); writing – review and editing (equal). Ismail Ogulur: Conceptualization, methodology, visualization, writing – original draft, writing – review and editing. Yagiz Pat: Conceptualization, methodology, visualization, writing – original draft. Arturo Rinaldi: Conceptualization, methodology, visualization, writing – original draft. Ozge Ardicli: Conceptualization, methodology, visualization, writing – original draft. Lacin Cevhertas: Conceptualization, methodology, visualization, writing – original draft. Marie‐Charlotte Brüggen: Conceptualization, visualization, writing – review and editing. Claudia Traidl‐Hoffmann: Conceptualization, visualization, writing – review and editing. Mubeccel Akdis: Conceptualization, methodology, visualization, writing – review and editing. Cezmi Akdis: Conceptualization, methodology, supervision, visualization, writing – review and editing.