This is an open access article under the terms of the http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ License, which permits use and distribution in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited, the use is non‐commercial and no modifications or adaptations are made.

Environmental exposure plays a major role in the development of allergic diseases. The exposome can be classified into internal (e.g., aging, hormones, and metabolic processes), specific external (e.g., chemical pollutants or lifestyle factors), and general external (e.g., broader socioeconomic and psychological contexts) domains, all of which are interrelated. All the factors we are exposed to, from the moment of conception to death, are part of the external exposome. Several hundreds of thousands of new chemicals have been introduced in modern life without our having a full understanding of their toxic health effects and ways to mitigate these effects. Climate change, air pollution, microplastics, tobacco smoke, changes and loss of biodiversity, alterations in dietary habits, and the microbiome due to modernization, urbanization, and globalization constitute our surrounding environment and external exposome. Some of these factors disrupt the epithelial barriers of the skin and mucosal surfaces, and these disruptions have been linked in the last few decades to the increasing prevalence and severity of allergic and inflammatory diseases such as atopic dermatitis, food allergy, allergic rhinitis, chronic rhinosinusitis, eosinophilic esophagitis, and asthma. The epithelial barrier hypothesis provides a mechanistic explanation of how these factors can explain the rapid increase in allergic and autoimmune diseases. In this review, we discuss factors affecting the planet’s health in the context of the ‘epithelial barrier hypothesis,’ including climate change, pollution, changes and loss of biodiversity, and emphasize the changes in the external exposome in the last few decades and their effects on allergic diseases. In addition, the roles of increased dietary fatty acid consumption and environmental substances (detergents, airborne pollen, ozone, microplastics, nanoparticles, and tobacco) affecting epithelial barriers are discussed. Considering the emerging data from recent studies, we suggest stringent governmental regulations, global policy adjustments, patient education, and the establishment of individualized control measures to mitigate environmental threats and decrease allergic disease.

As the genetics of allergic diseases have not thoroughly explained the considerable increases observed in the past decades, gene‐environment interaction studies, as well as Mendelian randomization techniques, underline the basis of environmental triggers for allergic diseases, making them primarily considered to be environmental diseases.

Afterward, three overlapping domains have been defined as general external environment (climate, biodiversity, urban environment, and socioeconomic factors); specific external environment (allergens, microbes, diet, tobacco, and pollutants); and host‐dependent internal environment (metabolic factors, inflammation, and oxidative stress).

Further, as a novel but a potentially broader explanatory approach, Renz et al. put forth the concept of the meta‐exposome, which takes into consideration the bidirectional effect of the environment on human subjects and influence of humans on all other living systems and their genomes.

The recently introduced ‘epithelial barrier hypothesis’ proposes that exposure to the urban environment and significant changes in the urban exposome by modernization, industrialization, and urbanization damages and initiates inflammation of the epithelium, the cellular layer that covers the surface of the skin, as well as the respiratory, urogenital, and gastrointestinal tract.

The epithelial barrier concept is initially introduced by assigning the epithelial tasks of keeping away the noxious environmental insults, such as the epithelial barrier, secretory IgA, and lamina reticularis thickening. The second set of events consist of washing away the inflammation by draining from tissues toward the lumen, ciliary movement, mucus production, and the immune regulatory function exerted by various regulatory cells, their cytokines, and cell surface factors.

Local epithelial damage to the skin and mucosal barriers lead to type 2 inflammation in the tissues and development of allergic conditions presenting as atopic dermatitis (AD), asthma, allergic rhinitis (AR), chronic rhinosinusitis (CRS), and eosinophilic esophagitis. These diseases and the epithelial barrier damage always develop in association with changes in microbiome.

In the gut, leaky epithelial barriers and microbial imbalance may contribute to the onset or development of many chronic autoimmune and metabolic diseases, such as diabetes, obesity, rheumatoid arthritis, multiple sclerosis, or ankylosing spondylitis.

These diseases may be triggered or aggravated by distant inflammatory responses and changes in the gut or lung microbiome. Moreover, defective epithelial barriers have also been linked to neurodegenerative and psychiatric diseases such as Parkinson’s disease, Alzheimer’s disease, autism spectrum disorders, and chronic depression.

Environmental exposures can directly disrupt the epithelial barriers of the gut, skin, and respiratory tract and alter the structure of the microbiome. Thus, leaky epithelium and impaired immunoregulation in the affected organs influence the development of a chronic ongoing inflammation.

Furthermore, changes and loss of microbial biodiversity in urban environments secondary to delivery by cesarean section, early antibiotic exposures, reduced exposure to farm‐life, and lack of pets in the houses leading to low endotoxin exposures have been suggested to increase allergic diseases due to the development of microbial dysbiosis in early life.

The industrial revolution in the 19th century affected our planet leading to drastic changes in environmental homeostasis, which is defined as the healthy interrelationship of living organisms with their environment. Humans have been exposed to more than 200,000 new molecules since the industrial revolution, particularly during the last 60 years, without a clear understanding of their toxicity or means to mitigate their effects. The concepts of chronic exposure, molecular and microscopic changes, epigenetic changes, and their synergistic and additive affects were not considered for regulation of these new molecules.

Various emerging health threats including dramatic increases in air pollutants such as particulate matter (PM), diesel exhaust, nitrogen dioxide (NO2), ozone (O3), and tobacco smoke, the alarming effects of global warming, changes and loss of biodiversity, and the complex interactions between all these factors are affecting all living beings.

Another important environmental insult that negatively affects health is the change in dietary habits due to increases in the consumption of dietary fatty acids and processed foods, usage of emulsifiers, and decrease of antioxidant content in western‐type diet, which is widely consumed (Figure 1).

Effect of external exposome on epithelial barriers of skin, lung, and intestine. Extreme weather events, wild fires, global warming due to the climate change, air pollution and changes and loss of biodiversity; increased consumption of processed foods, n‐6 fatty acids and genetically modified food; exposure to environmental substances; and the increase in harmful opportunistic pathogens, loss of microbiome diversity and decrease in commensals; disrupts the barriers of skin, lung, and intestine and causes allergic diseases such as asthma, atopic dermatitis, food allergy, and allergic rhinitis. CH4: methane, NOx: nitric oxides, CO2: carbon dioxide, CO: carbon monoxide, SO2: sulfur dioxide, O3: ozone, GM: genetically modified

Here, we discuss the impacts of climate change and the exposome, the relationship between the microbiome of skin, gut, oropharynx, lung, and exposome; the effect of increased fatty acid consumption due to the changes in dietary habits; environmental agents (detergents, disinfectants, household cleaners, airborne pollen, PM, O3, microplastics, nanoparticles, and tobacco) that affect epithelial barriers and finally the epithelial barrier hypothesis. We review the changes in the external exposome within the last decades and their effects on epithelial barriers in relation to allergic diseases.

Climate change refers to any change in climate and weather patterns altered for an extended time period. Some authorities (Framework Convention on Climate Change) define climate changes as that which attributable directly or indirectly to human activities which alter the composition of the global atmosphere, in natural climate variability observed over comparable time periods.

It is noteworthy that although it took nearly a century to convince the scientific authorities that human actions could alter the climate of the entire world, there is now consensus on the levels of carbon dioxide (CO2), methane (CH4), nitrous oxide (NO), and fluorinated gases that are increased as a result of industrialization, urbanization, and population growth and are accumulating in the atmosphere trapping heat leading to the greenhouse effect and anthropogenic climate change.

Urbanization is linked to the rising levels of pollutants in the air, as well as water and soil. These environmental changes are modifying spatial and transient dissemination of aeroallergens such as pollens and dust mites causing recurrence of respiratory allergic diseases over a long period of time in most industrialized countries as well as in developing countries.

Higher temperatures have been shown to prolong the pollen season, and higher CO2 levels lead to an increase in the biomass of pollen and pollen production, which makes the plants produce more pollen and allergens. Likewise, the overall pollen season of all pollen types has been indeed extended. Most pollen types have shifted toward earlier times of the year for pollen outputs (i.e., ragweed), possibly aggravating the burden on pollen‐allergic patients.

Air pollutants, especially NO2, which is more prevalent in urban locations, also collaborate with airborne allergens and alter the biological functions of pollens by decreasing viability, altering the physicochemical characteristics of the pollen surface, and increasing their allergenic potential through pro‐inflammatory properties by acting as an adjuvant, and therefore pose a greater risk for the development of atopic sensitization and symptoms in sensitized individuals.

Health effects of climate change. Climate change causes mental health illness such as anxiety, depression, and post‐traumatic stress; causes respiratory and allergic diseases through air pollution and increased allergens; causes malnutrition through affecting water and food supplies; causes infectious diseases such as vector‐borne (malaria, hantavirus, lyme disease) and water transmitted diseases (cholera, harmful algal blooms); causes cardiovascular diseases, and heat stress due to extreme heat and air pollution

Epithelial barrier damaging agents from the environment. Allergens derived from bacteria, virus, and fungus; protease activity of allergens; surfactant, emulsifiers, and enzymes used as food additives; cigarette smoke, nanoparticles, particulate matter, and pollutant gases including nitric oxides, sulfur dioxide, carbon monoxide, carbondioxide, methane, ozone; microplastics irreversibly damage epithelial barriers by disrupting intercellular connections and anchoring of epithelial cells. Zonula occludens 1–3, occludin, claudins, junctional adhesion molecules, E‐cadherin and desmosomes are depicted as damaged epithelial molecules. CH4: methane, NOx: nitric oxides, CO2: carbondioxide, CO: carbon monoxide, SO2: sulfur dioxide, O3: ozone, ZO: Zonula occludens, JAM: junctional adhesion molecules

It was mentioned that SARS‐CoV‐2 cell entry factor (SCEF) is important for the entrance of COVID‐19 virus to the upper airway epithelium, while in smokers it was also shown that SARS‐CoV‐2 can easily penetrate both the upper and lower airways epithelium.

Moreover, a significant positive correlation between COVID‐19 infection and airborne pollen concentration was reported by Damialis et al. The authors have mentioned that the interaction of the coronavirus and pandemic viruses with similar potential in the future may be exacerbated by the increased abundances of airborne pollen, because pollen exposure weakens antiviral immune response.

The association between climate change and infectious disease is well established, but burden of the effects and affected pathogens remain under‐studied. In 2017, McIntyre et al. published the first large‐scale systematic assessment of climate effects on pathogens, concluding that zoonotic pathogens may be more climate sensitive as 75% of emerging diseases are zoonotic.

There is scientific evidence suggesting that it is crucial to take timely action against air pollution and greenhouse gas production to control urbanization‐induced climate change and biodiversity loss and change, which will contribute to the higher burden of allergic diseases in the near future.

Healthcare professionals should now take leadership and responsibility to guide policy decision makers for bringing solutions to lessen the harm to our exposome in an evidence‐based manner. Any attempt to reduce PM and CO2 emission would address both air pollution and climate change, which can be achieved by strict policy decisions to obtain long‐lasting health effects. Moreover, appropriate controls for reducing greenhouse gases and air pollution may also diminish the negative health aspects of changing bioaeresols (i.e., pollens, fungi). In addition, artificial plantation and transportation of new species may also increase the negative health risks associated with bioaeresols. This issue can be discussed in the future larger reports. It is also crucial to prioritize the surveillance for pathogens that may respond to climate change and contribute to strengthening climate change resilience for infectious diseases in order to act against new epidemics such as Zika virus in South America or even the COVID‐19 pandemic.

Climate change poses a significant threat to respiratory health by directly generating or exacerbating pre‐existing respiratory disorders. It is vital to highlight that the prevalence of asthma has risen in recent decades and is expected to rise further.

Besides, aeroallergens play important roles in the pathophysiology of AR, and their distribution varies by geographical regions depending on the type of climate. Therefore, it can be assumed that the impact brought about by global warming will affect the distribution of aeroallergens and pollen mass, thus, these may effect the prevalence of asthma and AR.

A recent study in Georgia, USA, showed that the concentration of several tree pollen taxa increased over the last 27 years, and multiple species started to release their pollens earlier. The authors have concluded that early pollen discharge of some species could be associated with warmer temperatures.

In a retrospective analysis of datasets lasting 20 years or longer from 17 locations in the northern hemisphere showed that increases in daily minimum and maximum temperatures over time were associated with increases in both pollen load and duration of pollen season.

In another study, an approximately twenty days earlier start date in pollen season, lengthening of the pollen season by about eight days over the same period and an increase of pollen concentration by twenty‐one percent across North America were found and those findings were associated with increased temperatures.

On the other hand, it is envisioned that climate change may increase the amount of indoor and outdoor molds by increasing humidity in the buildings due to increasing floods and heavy rains. Although, there are not enough studies to validate these associations, in 2005, after the aftermath of hurricanes Katrina and Rita in New Orleans, the levels of mold spores were detected extremely high in the water‐damaged houses. Endotoxins and fungal glucans of predominantly Aspergillus niger, Penicillium spp., Trichoderma, and Paecilomyces. were also high in the environment and were found to be associated with health effects.

In another study on fungal exposure of workers participating inpost‐hurricane renovation in the same area, the workers were exposed to increased levels of fungi, but their levels dropped significantly in the first year after hurricanes. Therefore, although the burden of molds increases due to climatic reasons, there are no data showing that this change is permanent.

In addition, a study from the San Francisco Bay Area in the USA used time series regression models and noted season length for the most frequent outdoor molds has increased over the last two decades. Finally, the authors suggested that mold spore and pollen activity are connected to variations in observed climate change factors.

Unfortunately, the concerning outcomes of industrialization, global warming, and climate change are not limited to variations seen in aeroallergens. Air pollution and climate change are inextricably linked. Fossil fuels, the primary source of CO2 emissions, are also major air pollutant that contribute to climate change. A case‐crossover study from Belgium reported that air pollutants cause more severe AR.

Khreis et al. conducted a study across 18 European countries including 63,442,419 children and reported that nearly one‐third of all childhood asthma cases might be linked to exposure to air pollution. Based on their findings, the authors hypothesized that adherence to the recommendations of World Health Organization Air Quality Guidelines could prevent up to 11% of childhood asthma cases each year.

Common limitations mentioned in these studies include the heterogeneity and complexity of asthma, the existence of confounders such as smoking, parental atopy, breastfeeding, and challenges in diagnosing asthma, especially in children. However, over the past decades, some natural disasters like thunderstorms, dust storms, and wildfire smokes have created an opportunity to observe patients with already diagnosed asthma, free from some of these confounding factors during a climate change‐driven event

(Figure 4). Thunderstorm‐related asthma epidemics are good demonstrative in vivo models for the impact of heavy rain on pollen's capacity to trigger asthma symptoms whether the patient had symptoms or not in the past. Many studies have shown that thunderstorms increase asthma exacerbations and therefore the number of hospital admissions due to the increased airborne pollen grains and fungal spores.

Current hypothesis indicates a mechanical effect with thunderstorms with heavy rain, wind, lightnings, or both, fragmenting pollens into smaller allergenic particles. Sub‐pollen particles ‘attract’ humidity and create droplets, and then descend to the ground drops of water containing potentially allergenic small particles quickly hit the ground and are sprayed into the air, contributing to the creation of bioaerosols. These tiny particles can then easily penetrate deeper into the airways to trigger asthma attacks.

A study supporting this hypothesis demonstrated that increasing pollen fragment concentrations were associated with thunderstorms, strong downdrafts, and high rates of rainfall and that pollen fragments persisted in the atmosphere for several hours after the storms.

The most recent and probably the most catastrophic thunderstorm asthma epidemic struck Melbourne, Australia, in 2016. There was more than a sixfold increase in respiratory‐related presentations to public hospitals in 30 h. A study that evaluated the risk factors for hospital admissions found higher odds ratio among patients with known asthma.

Aside from thunderstorms, inhalation of fine particles in smoke during wildfires can induce lung irritation. An analysis in California, USA, showed that the October 2017 wildfires were responsible for over 300 asthma and cardiovascular‐related hospital admissions.

Environmental factors that play a role in asthma exacerbations. Air pollution with gases (NOx, SO2, O3, CO2, CO, CH4) and particulate pollutants (PM2.5 and PM10) emitted from industrial smog and wildfire smog, environmental tobacco smoke, heat waves, sandstorms, and airborne pollen cause asthma exacerbations. Moreover, extreme heat causes early and prolonged pollen discharge, and thunderstorms cause bioaerosols containing potentially allergenic small particles due to the rapid hit of water droplets to the ground. All of these factors may have a direct or indirect effect on epithelial shedding, goblet cell hyperplasia, airway hyperresponsiveness, increased basement thickness, subepithelial fibrosis, extracellular matrix (ECM) deposition, smooth muscle proliferation, and immune cell infiltration in the airways and exacerbate asthma

It is still uncertain whether this increase could be attributed to the increases in atmospheric CO2 concentration and temperature. A few studies have investigated the impact of elevated CO2 concentration on peanuts and demonstrated that they are responsive to these factors and suggest that their allergenic characteristics could also be influenced.

Compared to other allergic diseases, it is seen that different consequences of climate change, such as UV lights, cold and dry weather conditions, and floods, have more influence on AD. Global warming is thought to be causing floods by melting polar ice caps, rising sea levels, and heavier rains. Floods have been shown to have an impact on childhood AD flare‐ups, according to a retrospective study conducted in Taiwan.

The study hypothesized that increased levels of molds in the indoor environment and prolonged exposure to contaminated water could trigger an AD flare‐up in sensitized children. In an observational study, 60 patients with AD were followed for 18 months and high levels of air pollutants such as PM10, NO2, and O3, as well as an increased pollen counts were found to exacerbate AD symptoms.

Although global climate change could allow more harmful UV‐B to reach the Earth’s surface by decreasing stratospheric O3, combined with industrialization and urbanization, it may also decrease UV light penetration by increasing cloud cover, dust, smoke from wildfires, and other airborne particles. A comprehensive study examined the link between air pollution and allergic diseases and found that exposure to oxidants such as O3 and NO2 at birth increased the risk of developing asthma by 17% and eczema by 7%

The contribution of the microbiomes of the skin, gastrointestinal and respiratory tracts to health and disease is well established. Studies on allergic diseases and microbiota and external exposome (Cesarean section, feeding with formula, use of prebiotics or probiotics, diets high in fat and low in fiber content, early antibiotic usage in infancy, etc.) have identified that human microbiota has a central role in the regulation of this process.

Due to the drastic changes in modern environments, hygiene, and lifestyles, the variance of content of gut and skin microbiota may contribute to the development of various chronic inflammatory diseases including asthma, and other allergic diseases, and may trigger autoimmunity.

Human DNA is assumed to represent only a small percentage of all DNA in the human body. A much higher percentage of the genetic contribution is made by the so‐called human microbiome, which consists mostly of bacteria, fungi, viruses, archaea, and other microorganisms.

The effect of microbiota on immunity‐related diseases is known not only on naturally colonized microorganisms at the barrier sites, such as the gut, skin, lung, and other mucosal surfaces, but also on non‐barrier organs such as liver, kidneys, joints, lungs, eyes, and brain.

One of the main events following epithelial barrier damage is the colonization of opportunistic pathogens, such as Staphylococcus aureus (S.aureus), Moraxella, Hemophilus, and Pneumococcus. S.aureus has become the dominating bacterial species in AD skin lesions and chronic rhinosinusitis.

In the first years of life, early exposure to protective commensals such as Staphylococcus epidermidis prepares tolerogenic Treg cells and contributes to the development of commensal‐specific skin‐resident memory cells and effector T cells that support the innate microbial defense.

Immediately within a few hours of birth, infants undergo rapid colonization of microbiota. Initially, the gut microbiome is generally composed of Escherichia coli and Enterococcus species, followed by anaerobes including Bifidobacteria, Bacterioides, and Clostridium spp. that become predominant in line with decreasing oxygen concentrations in the gut.

Parasitic gut infection is another potential mediator for gut‐lung axis via the altered intestinal microbiota and the induction of pulmonary Tregs. This has been suggested partially to explain the high atopy rates in developed countries with low helminthic exposure.

Exposure to different microorganisms (bacteria, mold, virus, protozoan, and helminths) may induce epigenetic changes that affect the immune system modulation and result in the development of inflammatory diseases. During the maternal and postnatal periods known as the ‘window of opportunity’, maternal infections, microbiota, diet, drugs, and environmental exposures such as pollutants have a profound importance for the modulation of the immune system.

These effects educate the innate immunity of the newborn and regulate the response‐ability to those microorganisms that pass through maternal vertical transmission and colonize in the body habitats. Depending on the content and functional features, these preliminary microorganisms remodel the composition and accumulation rate of exogenous microorganisms in the first year of life.

Furthermore, chemical and physical environmental factors can alter the host‐microbiota interactions. For example, sun exposure has been shown to alter antimicrobial peptides via UV radiation because UV can kill microbes and modulate the skin microbiota.

Studies have shown that human health is closely associated with the balance of the common microbial community, the so‐called halobiont homeostasis. Microbial biodiversity and the interactions among various microorganisms have functional outcomes. The change and loss of biodiversity lead to a more unstable and less resistant microbiota, often dominated by one or few microorganisms; this is a phenomenon known as dysbiosis, which can alter the immune balance maintained by the gut, skin, and respiratory microbiomes and cause diseases.

The healthy microbiota on the mucosal surface regulates various aspects of barrier homeostasis such as barrier permeability modulation, TJ expression, angiogenesis, vascular permeability, local micro‐inflammation, and mucosal tolerance (Table 2). On the other hand, dysbiosis together with epithelial barrier leakiness damages immune homeostasis at the affected tissue.

In a healthy situation, the microbiome stays above the epithelium to live together, with a homeostatic interaction driven from co‐evolution, however, when the epithelial barrier becomes leaky, dysbiotic commensals and opportunistic pathogens migrate in between the affected epithelial cells and translocate beneath the epithelium. This is easily visible in the CRS epithelium by light microscopy and clearly takes place in the affected gut epithelium in colitis.

Perinatal and/or early‐life microbial exposure affects physiological development, and exposure to farming environments, environments with high microbial or allergen loads at this age is associated with a reduced risk of asthma and other allergic diseases in children.

Regular contact with farm animals increases indoor home endotoxin concentrations, which might explain the protective effect of contact with farm animals on atopic outcomes, and it is hypothesized that the farm environment can provide immunomodulatory stimuli.

Host microbiota has been primarily linked to asthma pathogenesis via gut microbial metabolites. Having a higher abundance of certain gut bacteria like Faecalibacterium, Lachnospira, Rothia, Bifidobacterium, or Akkermansia, especially during the first month of life, has been associated with protection against allergic sensitization and allergic asthma.

Although there is still a limited link in the relationship between nasal microbiome dysbiosis and the development of AR, the nasal microbiome potentially holds an important role in the modulation of localized immune responses. In the normal nasal mucosa S. aureus, Propionibacterium, Prevotella, Corynebacterium, Bacteroides, and Streptococcus are common. However, in AR, the abundance of S. aureus, Propionibacterium, Corynebacterium, and Peptoniphilus is considerably increased, whereas the numbers of Prevotella and Streptococcus are decreased.

In a study, 180 children, aged between 7 and 11 years, from Finnish and Russian Karelia (both have similar climates, the former is a more modernized area and latter is a rural environment) were followed up for 10 years, and atopic sensitization and allergic diseases were found to be up to 10‐fold higher in Finnish Karelia. Bacterial and fungal populations in the nasal mucosa were more abundant and diverse in Russian participants than Finnish peers, and it was stated that early‐life exposure to environmental microbiota might be biologically related to allergic manifestations at a younger age (Table 3).

According to current knowledge, the pathogenesis of AD is defined by the interplay between genetic background and epithelial barrier defects, epigenetic changes, immunologic factors, dysbiosis in the skin and gut microbiota, and external risk factors.

It is a major question whether barrier disruption in the affected organs starts first or proceeds microbial dysbiosis (Table 2). In other words, it is still unclear whether dysbiosis of the skin microbiome is one of the pathogenetic factors of AD or the cause of the onset of AD. On the other hand, skin barrier disruption due to genetic defects in barrier molecules such as filaggrin mutations can initiate AD.

The gut microbiome is a dynamic environment constantly being influenced and modified by external factors, such as diet. Mechanisms of immune tolerance to food antigens appear with these modifications in this process. Disruptions in the immune responses and dysbiosis of the gut microbiome are associated with the development of FA.

Gut microbiome and bacterial diversity vary with factors such as maternal health, maternal diet, mode of delivery, dietary change with increasing age from the intrauterine stage to the first 3–4 years of life and intestinal colonization during infancy, which may affect the development of FA.

In recent years, many dietary hypotheses have been put forward in relation to allergic diseases, and changing dietary content is considered one of the most important environmental factors that cause allergies. Increased consumption of processed and fatty foods as a result of the conversion of the traditional diet to the western diet is often associated with the increase in the prevalence of allergic diseases.

In a combination study in humans and mouse models to show the counterregulatory actions of docosahexaenoic acid (DHA; C22:6, w‐3)‐derived protectin D1 (PD1) in allergic airway inflammation, it was shown that PD1 administration decreased airway eosinophil count, T lymphocyte recruitment, airway mucus, levels of IL‐13, cysteinyl leukotrienes, PGD2, and airway hyperresponsiveness to inhaled methacholine. These studies present the importance of PD1 in reducing airway inflammation and the importance of an omega‐3‐rich diet in terms of maintaining airway homeostasis.

In an in vitro study, the D‐series resolvins PD1 and resolvin D1 derived from the omega‐3 (v‐3) fatty acid DHA have been shown to have potent pro‐resolution activities in allergic airway inflammation by intranasal administration. PD1 and resolvin D1 have been shown to reduce the total number of inflammatory cells and eosinophils in bronchoalveolar lavage and lung tissue and to cause goblet cell metaplasia in the airways of mice.

However, within the last century, this ratio has increased up to 10–20:1 due to nutritional changes. This rapid change in the n‐6/n‐3 ratio, which is recommended to be approximately 5:1, also increased the negative impacts of n‐6 fatty acids and their metabolites. It is known that arachidonic acid (AA), one of the n‐6 fatty acid metabolites, increases the inflammatory response via eicosanoids. The increase in thromboxane A2, prostaglandin E2, and leukotriene B4 eicosanoid levels in the body also increase allergic sensitivity.

In addition, genetically modified (GM) organisms, which is the general name given to plants, animals, or microorganisms whose specific characteristics have been modified by transferring genes from species other than their own by biotechnological methods, is another important problem of our era. In recent years, GM plants have been increasingly used for food production and industrial applications. Some studies have suggested that transgenic crops may have allergic effects.

However, it should be noted that the reported studies are limited to short‐term follow‐ups, and long‐term results are unknown. In addition, a new protein is transferred by gene transfer technology, and most of the allergens are in protein structure. Therefore, longer‐term studies about the effects of GM foods on humans are needed. Another current issue is that rural life, contact with farm animals, and consumption of non‐pasteurized milk at an early age prevent the development of allergic diseases as a result of increased exposure to nonmicrobial‐derived N‐glycolylneuraminic acid (Neu5GC).

However, in a systematic review of 8 studies on the consumption of n‐3 fatty acids involving 3,366 women and their 3,175 children, the evidence was limited to recommend supplementation of n‐3 fatty acids during pregnancy and/or lactation to reduce allergic disease in children.

In the chromatographic analysis of the fecal samples of 301 one‐year‐old children, the highest fecal butyrate and propionate levels (≥95th percentile) were associated with less atopic sensitization and development of asthma between 3 and 6 years of age.

Two systematic reviews and meta‐analyses reported that the beneficial effects of vitamins A, D, C, E, and, zinc on asthma outcomes were weak, but low dietary intakes of vitamins A and C were associated with a statistically significant likelihood of asthma and wheezing. Unlike vitamins A and C, vitamin E intake was not associated with asthma.

Vitamin A is metabolized to retinoic acid (RA) by CD103+ dendritic cells (DCs). This DC‐derived RA has significant effects on DC activity, and depending on its concentration, promotes Th17 cells or Tregs. So far, specific microbial strains such as Bifidobacterium longum subsp infantes have been shown to promote RA metabolism, fork head box P3 (FoxP3)+ Treg cells, induce mucosal immune tolerance, and protect against inflammatory diseases.

The prevalence of AD, a common, chronic, and recurrent inflammatory disease characterized by skin barrier impairment, has increased globally across all age groups, and this increase has also been associated with the westernization of dietary patterns and increased consumption of processed food.

Nutrition during infancy and childhood is very important for the development of AD, and breastfeeding for the first 6 months is thought to be effective in preventing the development of atopic diseases. A study conducted with 4,089 patients showed that breastfeeding for the first 4 months reduces the risk of eczema in the first 4 years.

Studies investigating the effects of dietary fatty acids on AD in adults are quite limited and conflicting. Although some studies have indicated that low n‐3 intake is inversely correlated with AD in women and one randomized control trial noted that AD severity decreases after n‐3 supplementation; another studies have found no association between n‐3 intake and AD, and other clinical studies reported that n‐3 supplementation in adults did not show any benefit over placebo in AD.

Clinical studies investigating the effect of n‐3 fatty acids on FA during pregnancy and/or lactation are contradictory but, starting fish oil supplementation early in pregnancy and continuing during lactation has been shown to reduce allergic sensitization to food proteins in offspring.

Following the industrial revolution in the 19th century, environmental health threats such as air pollution and chemical hazards have increased worldwide. With the increase in PM, diesel exhaust, O3, nanoparticles, and cigarette smoke, the air that we breathe has been dangerously polluted. The toxic burden faced by humans has increased with the introduction of cleaning products, detergents, and surfactants, as well as with increases in the use of processed foods and emulsifiers.

The steep increase in type 2 inflammatory diseases, that is, asthma and AD, coincide with the usage of surfactants and enzymes in laundry detergents and household cleaners in the 1960s, and food allergy and eosinophilic esophagitis coincide with the use of food emulsifiers and dishwasher detergents after 1990s. Besides, the increasing load of nanoparticles and microplastics in the seas, soils, and nowadays in the indoor and inner‐city air pose a significant threat to living beings. Recent research has revealed that environmental exposures, climate change, and global warming adversely affect airborne pollens and increase their allergenicity.

Particulate matter is a mixture of solid particles and liquid droplets generated by human activity. Besides, it is formed in the atmosphere through chemical reactions of gases such as sulfur dioxide, nitrogen oxides, and certain organic compounds often emitted from industrial processes, motor vehicle exhaust, diesel and coal combustion, house heating, and wildfires. All types of PM (PM0.1, <0.1 μm in diameter; PM 2.5, <2.5 μm in diameter; PM10, <10 μm in diameter) particles behave like gases due to their small sizes and cause diseases, especially in the respiratory tract.

It has been demonstrated in vitro that PM 2.5 can disrupt the epithelial barrier by degrading TJ proteins in the lower and upper airways, downregulating occludin and claudin‐1 expressions, suppressing E‐cadherin levels, decreasing transepithelial electric resistance, and increasing paracellular permeability

In vivo and in vitro studies have revealed that PM2.5 is also associated with skin diseases such as AD, skin allergies, and eczema by causing DNA damage, irreversible lipid peroxidation, protein carbonation, and loss of structural epidermal proteins such as cytokeratin, filaggrin, and E‐cadherin in the skin epithelial barrier.

On the other hand, PM10 is also a significant contributor causing damage to airway epithelial cells. PM10 was reported to induce alveolar epithelial dysfunction by reducing occludin at the plasma membrane and dissociation of ZO‐1 in human and primary rat alveolar epithelial cells.

It must be noted that a link has been reported with PM 10 exposure not only to asthma but also to other inflammatory diseases. Exposure to airborne PM is associated with increases in multiple sclerosis in Stockholm, Sweden. Increased numbers of circulating myeloid DCs that express cytokines such as IL‐1β, IL‐6, and IL‐23, which stimulate the development of Th17 cells, were reported in these patients.

Their findings were associated with an increase in CCR6+ CD4+ T cells with the migratory capacity to pass through the blood–brain barrier. These findings suggest that PM causes chronic respiratory diseases, especially asthma, and exacerbate existing ones. Although the harmful effects of ultrafine particles such as PM0.1 are less well known, in an animal model, it was demonstrated that PM0.1 caused increase of lysosomal membrane permeability, oxidative stress, and lipid peroxidation at low doses and it caused necrosis in airway epithelial cells at high doses.

In recent years, nanoparticles (NPs), organic or inorganic, smaller than 100 nm, are increasingly used in various industries and contribute significantly to air pollution. NPs can produce quantum effects by confining their electrons and entering the human body through inhalation, ingestion, skin, or injection. Inhaled NPs pass through the pores in the alveolar‐capillary membrane, enter the interstitium and even into the systemic circulation via the blood and lymphatics.

Moreover, with their high lipid affinity, NPs coat and disrupt phospholipid membranes, interfere with lipid‐rich structures in the pulmonary circulation such as surfactants and endothelial cell junctions, and even destabilize lysosomal membranes triggering cell death.

The intestinal toxicity of NPs is less known, cationic liposome NPs containing ZnO, silver, aluminum, and nickel, as well as TiO2 and SiO2 NPs, accumulate across the intestinal epithelial barrier and then translocate by endocytosis by the M‐cell, or by disrupting the integrity of the cell membrane, or by phagocytosis by macrophages.

Nitrogen dioxide (NO2) is a major component of air pollution, especially an important component of the traffic‐related air pollution. However, due to the use of gas stoves, it is accepted as an important indoor pollutant as well as an outdoor pollutant.

Exposure to NO2 is associated with an increased risk of developing respiratory diseases due to its deep penetration into the lungs. This effect is thought to be via epithelial barrier damage. In an in vitro study investigating the effect of NO2 on airway epithelial defense functions; ciliary activity, mucociliary transport velocity, and epithelial permeability were significantly impaired in the NO2 exposed group of fifty‐two healthy rabbits.

In another animal model, it was suggested that after exposure to ≤1 ppm NO2 level, active ion transport across the airway epithelium was significantly increased without change in paracellular pathways for diffusion, and NO2 altered the cell membrane function.

A randomized controlled trial examining the effects of indoor NO2 in asthmatic children demonstrated that increased NO2 exposure was associated with a dose‐related increase in risk of higher asthma severity score, wheeze, night symptoms, and rescue medication use.

NO2 can cause epithelial barrier dysfunction in the upper as well as the lower airways. In an in vivo study evaluating the effects of 2 ppm NO2 exposure on human nasal epithelium by electron microscopy, the luminal margin membranes of ciliary cells were ultrastructurally altered in six of seven nasal epithelial samples after NO2 exposure.

Ozone gas has a variable lifetime and occurs both in the upper and lower atmospheres, almost at ground level. Ground‐level O3 is the main component of photochemical smog and is formed in the presence of sunlight by chemical reactions between oxides of nitrogen and volatile organic compounds emitted by motor vehicles, power plants, industrial boilers, refineries, and chemical plants. Even during colder months, O3 can reach high levels and be carried long distances by wind and spread to rural areas.

Due to its poor water solubility, inhaled O3 can penetrate deep into the lungs. Acute exposure can damage alveolar cells, bronchiolar epithelium, and capillary endothelium initially with cell stress, desquamation, followed by protein leakage, neutrophil, and macrophage influx, and production of IL‐1α and IL‐33 from epithelial and myeloid cells.

At the beginning of this century, the scarcity of oils used in soap production and the desire to find stronger cleaning agents led to the start of work to produce the first synthetic detergent. Within the last several decades, the use of detergents for laundry, dishwashing, household, or industrial area cleaning has tremendously increased, with a change in their formulation, including cosmetics and personal care products. The increase in the incidence of allergic diseases in the same period suggested that detergents may trigger the formation of allergic diseases by affecting the associated epithelial barriers, especially the skin and respiratory tract

Furthermore, it has been observed that with the increased need for hand cleaning during the COVID‐19 pandemic, disinfectants worsen the disease in individuals with a previous history of AD or contact dermatitis and even also cause eczema in healthy individuals.

The airway epithelial barrier is as sensitive as the skin barrier to detergents. Detergent residues on newly washed clothes and on the surface of the floor can be easily inhaled, and even at very low concentrations, they directly damage TJs and related molecules of the airways.

In the same study, RNA sequencing demonstrated an increase in cytokines such as IL‐25, IL‐33, and TSLP that initiate type 2 immunity, even in 50,000 times diluted commercial laundry detergent damaged epithelial tissue. As a result, as reported in different occupational studies, the development of asthma or exacerbation of respiratory symptoms in adults seems inevitable by inhaling sprays or vapors, namely aerosolized forms of detergents that are widely used in every field.

They are thickening the mucosal surface fluid, trapping commensal bacteria, avoiding a healthy interaction between the epithelium and commensals and alter the microbiota and disrupt mucus–bacterial interactions in mouse models to induce intestinal inflammation.

Water‐insoluble polymeric particles derived from petroleum are called microplastics (<5mm in size) and nanoplastics (1 nm‐1µm in size). Due to their cost‐effectiveness, small size, light, and compatible nature, these substances are used in many sectors. Secondary microplastics are formed when larger‐sized ‘macroplastics’ found in nature are degraded into smaller‐sized fragments by ultraviolet rays from the sun, waves, rain wind, and other decaying organisms. Humans are easily exposed to micro‐ and nanoplastics in daily life through contact, inhalation, and ingestion from water, soil, and air. These products can easily penetrate tissues and interact with cells and cellular structural molecules.

The amount of plastic produced per year exceeds 100 million tons and increasing plastic waste load in the seas and oceans poses a threat to the environment and the health of humans and affected animals. Today, increased levels of plastic are detected in fish and sea creatures. Microplastics have been detected even in drinking water, foods such as mussels, shrimp, fish, salt, sugar, honey, and beer. They have a high absorption capacity in the gastrointestinal tract, and the effects of microplastics have been shown both in vitro and in vivo.

(Figure 3). Different sizes of spherical fluorescent polystyrene particles (1, 4, and 10 µm) were used in the culture media, and it was observed that the one μm plastic particle is the most cytotoxic due to its high surface volume ratio. The study concluded that the smallest particles (<1.5 µm) might penetrate the gastrointestinal epithelial barrier

Tobacco, one of the most common toxic substances in the environment with its content of approximately 5,000 chemicals, causes toxicity especially to the respiratory system. In vitro studies have shown that tobacco causes rapid lipid peroxidation in the rat tracheal epithelium and is associated with alveolar epithelial damage in guinea pigs.

Even though e‐cigarettes are marketed as alternatives to aid smoking cessation, there is not enough evidence to show that they help. Moreover, their safety is questionable as they contain a number of toxic chemicals such as benzene, ethanol, iron, aluminum, cadmium, tobacco‐specific nitrosamines, polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons, and formaldehyde, in addition to their four main components: nicotine, propylene glycol, glycerol, and food flavorings.

Furthermore, flavorings in tobacco products have been shown to cause airway epithelial cell death, apoptosis, and dysfunction of macrophages through altering apoptotic cell recognition receptors and bronchial epithelial cell cytokine secretion pathways

Asp f 5, an allergen with metalloprotease properties from Aspergillus fumigatus, has been shown to increase IL‐4 and IL‐13 levels in mouse lung tissue and play a role in airway remodeling by changing the amount of collagen under the lung epithelial tissue.

The increase in understanding the underlying multiple and complex immune mechanisms, additional to the development of novel detailed diagnostic techniques and ease of access to comparable data have led to the proposal of several hypotheses explaining the complexity of chronic conditions, including allergic disorders. Such hypotheses can provide a framework toward understanding the relations between the immune system, allergens, environmental triggers and epigenetics, signs and symptoms of diseases, and demographics in the field of allergy. Among these ‘Hygiene hypotheses’ has initially focused on explaining the increase in allergic disorders with decreased incidence of infections in westernized countries, which is mainly based upon epidemiological data. With the evolution of our understanding about innate and adaptive arms of the immune system and its regulation, the impacts of microbiome, exposome, genome, and epigenome, ‘atopic march’ have found their illustrative backbones.

Skin, in addition to respiratory and gastrointestinal mucosa, is the contact surface of the host with the external environment lined by epithelial barriers (epidermal barrier and epithelial mucosa). Functional derangement of the epithelial barrier, which acts as a first‐line physical defense and active site of the immune response, has been regarded as a factor responsible for the development of many diseases, including allergies and autoimmune diseases. Recently described ‘Epithelial barrier hypothesis’ emphasizes that environmental exposure to substances that are mainly toxic and hazardous have deleterious impacts onto these outermost access points, the barriers of the skin, airways, and gastrointestinal mucosa.

Epithelial cells play critical roles in the maintenance of homeostasis through a wide range of physiologic functions. There is a complex interplay between environmental factors, epithelium, and the immune system. Epithelial cells can secrete IL‐25, IL‐33, and TSLP in response to several stimuli, leading to a skewing of the immune response into Th2 type.

These cytokines activate DCs and group 2 innate lymphoid cells (ILC2). ILC2s share many functional similarities with Th2 cells, such as the production of IL‐4, IL‐5, IL‐9, and IL‐13 as well as other effector molecules potentiating the Th2 immune response.

Complex interplay between environmental factors, epithelium, and the immune system. Epithelial cells can secrete IL‐25, IL‐33, and TSLP in response to various stimuli from the environment resulting in a Th2 type shift of the immune response. These cytokines activate dendritic cells and group 2 innate lymphoid cells). ILC2s share many functional similarities with Th2 cells such as the production of IL‐5, and IL‐13 as well as other effector molecules that enhance the Th2 immune response. Eosinophils, basophils, and mast cells are attracted to the area and degranulate. Dysregulation of the epithelial barrier has been hypothesized to cause a leaky epithelium, which causes dysbiosis of the microbial content, decrease of commensals and increase of opportunistic pathogens. The translocation of microorganisms to interepithelial and subepithelial compartments induces inflammation. IL: interleukin, TSLP: thymic stromal lymphopoietin, DC: dendritic cell, ILC2: innate lymphoid cell‐2, EOS: eosinophil, BAS: basophil, MC: mast cell, MBP: major basic protein, ECP: eosinophilic cationic protein, LT: leukotriens, PGD2: Prostaglandin D2, Th0: naive T cell, Th2: T helper 2, Ig E: immunoglobulin E

It has been postulated that derangement of the epithelial barrier causes a leaky epithelium that results in dysbiosis of microbial content, including commensals and opportunistic pathogens and translocation of this content into interepithelial and subepithelial compartments, which induces micro‐inflammation.

In the skin, the epidermal barrier is composed of the stratum corneum and TJs. Change in the composition and dysfunction of lipids (ceramides, free fatty acids, and cholesterol) and structural proteins (filaggrin), elevated skin pH, and loss of microbiome diversity all may lead to impairment of epidermal barrier as seen in patients with AD.

While the transmembrane proteins including claudins, occludins and adhesion molecules compromising the TJs, their barrier functions are weakened by altered lipid and profilaggrin processing. Filaggrin is a structural protein that is essential for the regulation of epidermal homeostasis. Loss‐of‐function mutations in filaggrin have been proposed to cause epithelial barrier defects, which reduces epidermal defense against allergens, microorganisms, and other environmental insults and plays a role in the development of AD, as well as bearing risk for FA, AR, and asthma. This defect results in a skewing of immune response into Th2 type immune response with resultant chronic inflammation of the skin.

The importance of the epithelial barrier can be marked even in the early days of life. It has been revealed that the development of allergy to several foods in the absence of oral feeding may be linked to inflamed and disrupted epithelial barrier in infants with severe AD.

Also, airway epithelial cells not only comprise a physical barrier but also play key roles in immune, inflammatory, repair, and remodeling responses upon encounters with triggers, including inhaled allergens, pathogens, PMs, and chemicals. Additional to mucociliary clearance, epithelial cells can produce antimicrobial peptides, several chemokines, and cytokines that recruit and activate other effector cells and sustain clearance of pathogenic insults.

Claudin‐18 is required for the airway epithelial permeability barrier. Loss of claudin‐18 was sufficient to impair epithelial barrier function in human bronchial epithelial cells. IL‐13 decreases claudin‐18 expression in epithelial cells. Claudin‐18 mRNA levels were found to be lower in asthmatics than in healthy controls.

It has been understood that the common allergens such as HDMs and several pollens have cysteine and serine proteases that can disrupt the epithelial barrier. Similarly, molds including aspergillus and penicillium exert serine protease activity. Additional insults to these activities have dampened the immune response. A disrupted barrier is a site for dysbiosis in the airway epithelium as well. Change in the content of the microbiome also shapes the altered immune response. Infectious triggers have several impacts on airway epithelium. It is well known that human rhinovirus (HRV) infection is a trigger of asthma exacerbations. It has been reported that HRV increases inflammatory cytokine production, reduces IFN‐β production, and plays a role in wound repair by causing defective repair response in the epithelial cells of asthmatic children.

The intestinal epithelium is the largest mucosal surface in contact with the external environment. The gastrointestinal epithelial barrier has to defend against the passage of foreign antigens, several microbes, and their toxins, while it has to act as a selective barrier to absorb and exchange essential dietary nutrients, water, and electrolytes.

It has been proposed that the breakdown of oral tolerance to food could also be associated with a downregulated intestinal barrier function. In several experimental animal models and human clinical trials, the association between food allergy and defects in the intestinal barrier function has been emphasized.

The current exposome concept is a promising model to improve the uncertain data on the impact of environmental factors on the development of allergic diseases. External exposome has vital effects on human health related to climate change, air pollution, change and loss of biodiversity, change in dietary habits, and dysbiosis. These external factors that cause damage to the epithelium, and the disruption in the epithelial barrier constitutes a common pathway in the development of multiple allergic conditions. Moreover, the interaction between the epithelium and immune cells in addition to crosstalk with microbiota and environmental factors take part in the pathogenesis of atopic disorders including AD, AR, asthma, and FA. As a result, an increase in the incidence of allergic diseases secondary to external changes is expected in the medium and long term.

In this scenario, the task of scientific society is to give priority to external exposome research and establish the extensive usage of the exposome‐based approach for allergic diseases and asthma. The relationship between environmental exposure and allergic diseases should be assessed in longitudinal cohort studies with standardized exposure models. It is essential to understand the risk factors and preventive measures to be taken against them in multifactorial, chronic diseases such as allergic conditions. There is no doubt that these developments will ultimately lead to better prevention strategies.

From a public health perspective, the education of the population and the emergence of governmental decisions to prevent climate change, changes and loss of biodiversity, unhealthy dietary habits, and exposure to environmental substances (detergents, airborne pollen, O3, microplastics, nanoparticles, tobacco) are urgent measures to be considered throughout the world. In this global fight, mitigation measures can be undertaken to limit the harmful effects of all these threats. Furthermore, adaptation measures should be taken for the impacts of global warming.

These growing environmental threats need actions throughout the world with united forces of all capabilities. The unresponsiveness of governmental institutions, the resistance of the general population, lack of infrastructure, and poverty are all barriers to these efforts. Physicians have the most crucial role in promoting and activating the people on the health effects of environmental changes. A multidimensional approach involving all stakeholders will be necessary to overcome these environmental problems and develop a better future for our planet.

Dr. Akdis reports grants from Allergopharma, Swiss National Science Foundation, Christine Kühne‐Center for Allergy Research and Education, European Commission’s Horizon's 2020 Framework Programme, Cure, Novartis Research Institutes, Astra Zeneca, Glaxo Smith‐Kline, Scibase, advisory role in Sanofi/Regeneron, Scibase, Novartis, Glaxo Smith Kline. Other authors declare no conflicts of interest in relation to this work.

ZCS, DM, and CA conceptualized the scope of the article, decided the headings and subheadings, and distributed the tasks among all authors. BOO wrote the part of the environmental substances. PC and SA wrote the part of the effects of climate change. MT and IY wrote the part of microbiome, BG and UO wrote the part of the nutritional factors. CO wrote the part of the epithelial barrier hypothesis. ZCS reviewed and combined the contributions from all authors. ZCS, MA, IO, YM, KN, CO, DM, and CA reviewed the article and figures, contributed different sections, and harmonized the final version.