This is an open access article under the terms of the http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ License, which permits use and distribution in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited, the use is non‐commercial and no modifications or adaptations are made.

T lymphocytes are the key protective contributors in chronic infection and tumor, but experience exhaustion by persistent antigen stimulation. As an unconventional lineage of T cells, γδ T cells can rapidly response to varied infectious and tumor challenges in a non‐MHC‐restricted manner and play key roles in immune surveillance via pleiotropic effector functions, showing promising as candidates for cellular tumor immunotherapy. Activated γδ T cells can also acquire exhaustion signature with elevated expression of immune checkpoints, such as PD‐1, decreased cytokine production, and functional impairment. However, the exhaustion features of γδ T cells are distinct from conventional αβ T cells. Here, we review the researches regarding the characteristics, heterogeneity, and mechanisms of γδ T cell exhaustion. These studies provide insights into the combined strategies to overcome the exhaustion of γδ T cells and enhance antitumor immunity.

Exhausted T cells are functionally distinct from effector and memory T cells. The hallmarks of T cell exhaustion are progressive loss of effector function and proliferative ability, sustained high expression of inhibitory receptors (IRs), reduced responsiveness to homeostatic cytokines, altered epigenetic and transcriptional landscape, and specific metabolic program.

Vδ2 subsets are predominant in human peripheral blood (PB) with almost exclusively paired with Vγ9 chain (also termed Vγ9Vδ2 γδ T cell), while Vδ1 and Vδ3subsets constitute less than 30% of γδT cells in PB and are enriched in mucosal epithelial tissues and liver, respectively, with diverse paired Vγ chains.

Activated γδ T cells exhibit varied effector functions, including lysis of infected or stressed cells, cytokine and chemokine production, B cell help and IgE production, priming of αβ T cells via antigen presentation, dendritic cell maturation, and regulation of stromal cell function via growth factor production, maintaining the functional integrity of epithelial barriers and provide immunosurveillance by modulation of innate and adaptive immune responses.

Pathogen infection is the major driver of peripheral γδ T cell activation. In a mouse model of Plasmodium infection, Vγ1+ γδ T cells highly expressed markers of T‐cell exhaustion (TIM‐3, LAG‐3, and PD‐1) and the IFN‐γ‐producing ability of Vγ1+ γδ T cells is reduced in late‐phase due to γδ T‐cell dysfunction.

HIV infection is associated with a rapid and sustained inversion of the Vδ1:Vδ2 T‐cell ratio in PB. Activated Vδ1 subset exhibited significant expression of exhaustion markers CD95 and PD1 in HIV patients, suggesting persistent activation and altered function of Vδ1 T cells.

In another study, CD3εlo Vδ1 T cells were reported to frequently express terminally differentiated phenotypes and the immune checkpoint PD−1 but not LAG‐3, suggesting these cells are in a state of exhaustion and are unable to produce IL‐17 in HIV infection.

Although widely characterized in chronic infection, the exhaustion of γδ T cells has been investigated in tumor in recent years. In a colon cancer mouse model, tumor‐infiltrating CD8αα− PD‐1+ γδ T cells showed decreased expression of cytotoxic‐related genes, whereas displayed increased expression of genes associated with IL‐17 and protumor activity.

Analogous to the observations in mice, PD‐1 expression was elevated on γδ T cells with decreased IFN‐γ secretion and increased IL‐17 secretion in acute myeloid leukemia (AML), while TNF‐α and IL‐2 secretion level was similar to their PD‐1– γδ T counterparts.

Furthermore, PD‐1 expression on the surface of γδ T cells was down‐regulated in patients with complete remission after chemotherapy. These findings suggest PD‐1+ γδ T cells were highly activated or immune exhausted with unique cytokine secretion profile distinct from αβ T cells.

suggesting the expression of IRs does not always mark exhausted γδ T cells and can also be tightly linked to γδ T cell activation and differentiation. Recently, we have identified a γδ T subset characterized by high expression of PD‐1 that were significantly increased in colorectal cancer tissues. These tumor‐infiltrating PD‐1+γδ T cells express tissue resident, activation, and exhaustion markers, and maintain the capacity of a certain level of GzmB and Perforin secretion (unpublished data). The above evidence has demonstrated that activated γδ T cells can also exhibit exhaustion features both in chronic infection and tumor as described in CD8+ T cells, characterized but not restricted by simultaneous and progressive high expression of immune checkpoints.

Healthy aging and HIV infection independently drive TIGIT and multi‐IR expression on γδ T cells. CD160+ γδ T cells are a potential resting/precursor population to TIGIT+, TIGIT+CD160+, and PD‐1+TIGIT+CD160+ subsets and such IR expression is suggestive of an activated or exhausted state.

These evidence demonstrates that γδ T cells display a vast heterogeneity according to the IR expression and functional impairment (Figure 1). The existence of progenitor cells and whether the effector function of γδ T cells could be enhanced by stimulating progenitor cell proliferation and differentiation to terminal exhaustion state needs further study.

Similarly, mouse Eomeshi γδ T cells coexpressed Th1 lineage‐related factors such as CD27, T‐bet, and Ly6C, displayed an exhausted phenotype with high levels of PD‐1 and CD160, and were less capable of IFN‐γ production, highlighting Eomes as a marker for the differentiation exhaustion of Th1‐like effector γδ T cells.

Tuberculosis might inhibit the STAT3/JAK2 signaling pathway in Vδ2 T cells, leading to γδ T cell exhaustion in response to IL‐23/HMBPP costimulation. While the expansion of Vδ2 T cells induced by IL‐23 cannot be restored via blockade of the PD‐1 signaling.

The functional remodeling of exhausted γδ T cells is rarely studied, and most studies focus on PB γδ T cells. Zoledronic acid (Zol)+IL‐2 activates human PB γδ T cells in vitro to induce up‐regulation of PD‐1 expression, and anti‐PD‐1 monoclonal antibody can enhance IFN‐γ secretion of PD‐1+ γδ T cells.

Recently, PD‐1+ γδ T cells were reported to accumulate in tumor tissue of colorectal cancer with mismatch repair gene defects, and highly expressed activation‐related markers such as CD69, CD38, and HLA‐DR. These PD‐1+ γδ T cells can produce IFN‐γ, GzmB, and perforin stimulated by PMA, implicating that fully activated PD‐1+ γδ T cells displayed potentially cytotoxic activity in the antitumor immune response and are the potential target cells treated by immunocheckpoint blockade (ICB).

In view of the direct recognition characteristics, cytolytic activity, and interaction with other immune cells, γδ T cells have irreplaceable advantages in immunotherapy. Many clinical trials have been conducted to evaluate the antitumor role of γδ T cells via in vivo activation, adoptive cell transfer, and genetic engineering for cancer treatment.

Despite of the therapeutic efficiency, the loss of the γδ T cell persistent response is likely due to activation‐induced exhaustion and cell death due to repeated treatments with PAg. In avoid of Vδ2 T cell exhaustion through repetitive PAg stimulation, novel bispecific antibody Her2/Vγ9 were designed and applied after initially activated by PAg and IL‐2 in vivo.

In this infectious model, the efficiency of CD137 costimulation for Vγ9Vδ2 T cell activation, proliferation, survival, and effector function, provides a novel strategy of combination targeting CD137 with γδ T cell‐based immunotherapy to improve the antitumor therapeutic efficacy.

These studies demonstrated that rational design of CAR‐γδ T could overcome functional exhaustion. Further clinical studies examining the combination therapy with ICB, costimulation molecular agents, bispecific antibodies, and engineered γδ T cell immunotherapy are needed to ensure successful clinical application of γδ T cell‐based antitumor immunotherapy.

T cell exhaustion is the core of immune imbalance and γδ T cells are the critical participants in this process but are rarely studied compared to αβ T cells. γδ T cell exhaustion is characterized by the high expression of IRs and decreased cytokine production distinct from conventional αβ T cells. High expression of PD‐1 is not always associated with functional impairment and is even not necessary for defining γδ T cell exhaustion. γδ T cell exhaustion is more complex and unique, and there might be more accurate molecules in defining exhausted γδ T cells. In summary, γδ T cells show promising therapeutic potential in antitumor treatment, but the study of γδ T cell exhaustion is still in its infancy. Therefore, fully deciphering the characteristics, heterogeneity, and mechanisms of γδ T cell exhaustion will pave the way for combined strategies to overcome exhaustion and enhance antitumor immunity.

Di Chen, Yinglu Guo, and Jiahuan Jiang contributed in literature collection and manuscript writing. Pin Wu and Ting Zhang contributed in review discussion and language editing. Dang Wu, Jian Huang, and Qichun Wei participated in the design and review of the manuscript. Di Chen, Yinglu Guo, and Jiahuan Jiang contributed equally to this work.

This work was supported by the grant from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (82073142, D. W.; 82073141, P. W.; 81930079, J. H.; 82073332, Q. W.; and 82173089, T. Z.), Natural Science Foundation of Zhejiang Province (LY19H160050, D.W.;LR22H160006, P. W. and LY21H100004, T. Z.), and Immunoradiotherapy Research Fund of Chinese Society of Radiation Oncology (Z‐2017‐24‐2108, D. W.).